The Cardiac Cycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 33
Farly Extra Systolic Heart Sounds EcG /\
Abnormal early systolic sounds, or ejection clicks,
occur shortly after S,; and coincide with the opening of
the aortic or pulmonic valves (Fig. 2-4). These sounds /*
have a sharp, high-pitched quality, so they are heard Aorta
best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope placed
over the aortic and pulmonic areas (see Fig. 2-2). LV
Ejection clicks indicate the presence of aortic or pul-
monic valve stenosis or dilatation of the pulmonary
artery or aorta. In stenosis of the aortic or pulmonic MV opens
valve, the sound occurs as the deformed valve leaf- J
lets reach their maximal level of ascent into the great LA
artery, just prior to blood ejection. At that moment, | |
the rapidly ascending valve reaches its elastic limit bio 1 |
and decelerates abruptly, an action thought to result | |
in the sound generation. In dilatation of the root of
the aorta or pulmonary artery, the sound is associated $451 Sa S;
. . . . Ejection OS
with sudden tensing of the aortic or pulmonic root rick
with the onset of blood f ow into the vessel. The aortic
ejection click is heard at both the base (represented by FIGURE2-4. Timing of extra
the aortic and pulmonary regions in Fig. 2-2) and the ewe and diastolic heart sounds.
; —— 4 1S produced by atrial contraction
apex of the heart and does not vary with respiration.  jnto a “stiff” left ventricle (LW). An
In contrast, the pulmonic ejection click is heard only at ejection click follows the opening of
the base, and its intensity diminishes during inspira- _ the aortic or pulmonic valve in cases
tion (see Chapter 16). of valve stenosis or dilatation of the
corresponding great artery. S; occurs
during the period of rapid ventricular
Mid- or Late Extra Systolic Heart Sounds f lling; it is normal in young people,
but its presence in adults implies LV
Clicks occurring in mid- or late systole are usually the contractile dysfunction. The timing
result of systolic prolapse of the mitral or tricuspid of an opening snap (OS) in a patient
valves, in which the leaf ets bulge abnormally from the with mitral stenosis is placed for
ventricular side of the AV junction into the atrium dur- comparison. It is not likely that more
ing ventricular contraction, often accompanied by val- than one or two of these extra sounds
vular regurgitation (described in Chapter 8). They are eh one WN natal valve.
loudest over the mitral or tricuspid auscultatory regions,
respectively.
Extra Diastolic Heart Sounds
Extra heart sounds in diastole include the opening snap (OS), the third heart sound (S;), the
fourth heart sound (S,), and the pericardial knock.
Opening Snap
Opening of the mitral and tricuspid valves is normally silent, but mitral or tricuspid valvular
stenosis (usually the result of rheumatic heart disease; see Chapter 8) produces a sound,
termed as snap, when the affected valve opens. It is a sharp, high-pitched sound, and its
timing does not vary significantly with respiration. In mitral stenosis (which is much more
common than is tricuspid valve stenosis), the OS is heard best between the apex and the left
sternal border, just after the aortic closure sound (A), when the left ventricular pressure falls
below that of the left atrium (see Fig. 2-4).
34 (chapter 2
Because of its proximity to A;, the A,-OS sequence can be
confused with a widely split second heart sound. However, care-
Expiration Jos ful auscultation at the pulmonic area during inspiration reveals
three sounds occurring in rapid succession (Fig. 2-5), which cor-
S, S, respond to aortic closure (A;), pulmonic closure (P;), and then
the OS. The three sounds become two on expiration when A, and
P, normally fuse.
Inspiration | | Le: The severity of mitral stenosis can be approximated by the time
P interval between A, and the OS: the more advanced the stenosis,
Ay? the shorter the interval. This occurs because the degree of left atrial
FIGURE2-5. Timing of the opening pressure elevation corresponds to the severity of mitral stenosis.
snap (OS) in mitral stenosis does When the ventricle relaxes in diastole, the greater the left atrial pres-
not change with respiration. On sure, the earlier the mitral valve opens. Compared with severe ste-
inspiration, normal splitting of the nosis, mild disease is marked by a less elevated left atrial pressure,
second heart sound (S,) is observed so lengthening the time it takes for the left ventricular pressure to fall
that three sounds are heard. A;, aortic —_ below that of the atrium. Therefore, in mild mitral stenosis, the OS
component; P,, pulmonic component is widely separated from A,, whereas in more severe stenosis, the
of S,; S,, frst heart sound. . .
A,-OS interval is narrower.
Third Heart Sound (S;)
When present, an S; occurs in early diastole, following the opening of the AV valves, during
the ventricular rapid filling phase (see Fig. 2-4). It is a dull, low-pitched sound best heard with
the bell of the stethoscope. A left-sided S; is typically loudest over the cardiac apex while the
patient lies in the left lateral decubitus position. A right-sided S; is better appreciated at the
lower left sternal border. Production of the S; appears to result from tensing of the chordae
tendineae during rapid filling and expansion of the ventricle.

An §; is a normal finding in children and young adults. In these groups, an S; implies the
presence ofa supple ventricle capable of normal rapid expansion in early diastole. Conversely,
when heard in middle-aged or older adults, an S; is a sign of disease resulting from a dilated
ventricle (e.g., a patient with heart failure due to impaired systolic contraction, as described
in Chapter 9) or from the increased transvalvular fow that accompanies advanced mitral or
tricuspid regurgitation (described in Chapter 8). A pathologic S; is sometimes referred to as
a ventricular gallop.

Fourth Heart Sound (S,)
When an §, is present, it occurs in late diastole and coincides with contraction of the atria
(see Fig. 2-4). This sound is generated by the left (or right) atrium ejecting blood into a
stiffened ventricle. Thus, an S, usually indicates the presence of cardiac disease—specifically,
a decrease in ventricular compliance typically resulting from ventricular hypertrophy or myo-
cardial ischemia. Like an S;, the S, is a dull, low-pitched sound and is best heard with the bell
of the stethoscope. In the case of the more common left-sided S,, the sound is loudest at the
apex, with the patient lying in the left lateral decubitus position. S, is sometimes referred to
as an atrial gallop.

Quadruple Rhythm or Summation Gallop
In a patient with both an S; and S,, those sounds, in conjunction with S, and S,, produce a
quadruple beat. If a patient with a quadruple rhythm develops tachycardia, diastole becomes
shorter in duration, the S; and S, coalesce, and a summation gallop results. The summation
of S; and S, is heard as a long middiastolic, low-pitched sound, often louder than S, and S,.
The Gardiac Cycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 35
Pericardial Knock
A pericardial knock is an uncommon, high-pitched sound that occurs in patients with
severe constrictive pericarditis (see Chapter 14). It appears early in diastole soon after S,
and can be confused with an OS or an S;. However, the knock appears slightly later in dias-
tole than the timing of an OS and is louder and occurs earlier than does a ventricular gallop.
It results from the abrupt cessation of ventricular filling that occurs when the expanding
ventricle meets a rigid pericardium in early diastole, which is the hallmark of constrictive
pericarditis.
MURMURS
A murmur is the sound generated by turbulent blood fow. Under normal conditions, the
movement of blood through the vascular bed is laminar, smooth, and silent. However, as a
result of hemodynamic and/or structural changes, laminar fow can become disturbed and
produce an audible noise. Murmurs result from any of the following mechanisms:
1. Flow across a partial obstruction (e.g., aortic stenosis)
2. Increased f ow through normal structures (e.g., aortic systolic murmur associated with a
high-output state, such as anemia)
3. Ejection into a dilated chamber (e.g., aortic systolic murmur associated with aneurysmal
dilatation of the aorta)
4. Regurgitant f ow across an incompetent valve (e.g., mitral regurgitation)
5. Abnormal shunting of blood from one vascular chamber to a lower-pressure chamber (e.g.,
ventricular septal defect [VSD])

Murmurs are described by their timing, intensity, pitch, shape, location, radiation, and
response to maneuvers. Timing refers to whether the murmur occurs during systole or dias-
tole, or is continuous (i.e., begins in systole and continues into diastole). The intensity of the
murmur is typically quantified by a grading system. In the case of systolic murmurs:

Gade 1/6 (or I/ V1): Barely audible (i.e., medical students may not hear it!)

Gade 2/6 (or II/ WV): Faint but immediately audible

Gade 3/6 (or HI/M): Easily heard

Gade 4/6 (or IW Vi): Easily heard and associated with a palpable thrill

Gade 5/6 (or W VM): Very loud; heard with the stethoscope lightly on the chest

Gade 6/6 (or V/V): Audible without the stethoscope directly on the chest wall
I

And in the case of diastolic murmurs:

Gade 1/4 (or I/TV): Barely audible

Gade 2/4 (or IT/IV): Faint but immediately audible

Gade 3/4 (or HI/IV): Easily heard

Gade 4/4 (or IWIW): Very loud
eee

Pitch refers to the frequency of the murmur, ranging from high to low. High-frequency mur-
murs are caused by large pressure gradients between chambers (e.g., aortic stenosis) and are
best appreciated using the diaphragm chest piece of the stethoscope. Low-frequency murmurs
imply less of a pressure gradient between chambers (e.g., mitral stenosis) and are best heard
using the stethoscope’s bell piece.
36 Chapter 2

Shape describes how the murmur changes in intensity from its onset to its completion.
For example, a crescendo—decrescendo (or “diamond-shaped”) murmur first rises and then
falls off in intensity. Other shapes include decrescendo (i.e., the murmur begins at its maxi-
mum intensity then becomes softer) and uniform (the intensity of the murmur does not
change).

Location refers to the murmur’s region of maximum intensity and is usually described in
terms of specific auscultatory areas (see Fig. 2-2):

Aortic area: Second to third right intercostal spaces, next to the sternum

Pulmonic area: Second to third left intercostal spaces, next to the sternum

Tricuspid area: Lower left sternal border

Mtral area: Cardiac apex
I

From their primary locations, murmurs are often heard to radiate to other areas of the
chest, and such patterns of transmission relate to the direction of the turbulent f ow. Finally,
similar types of murmurs can be distinguished from one another by simple bedside maneu-
vers, such as standing upright, Valsalva (forceful expiration against a closed airway), or
clenching of the fists, each of which alters the heart’s loading conditions and can affect the
intensity of many murmurs. Examples of the effects of maneuvers on specific murmurs are
presented in Chapter 8.

When reporting a murmur, some or all of these descriptors are mentioned. For example,
you might describe a particular patient’s murmur of aortic stenosis as “A grade III/ VI high-
pitched, crescendo—decrescendo systolic murmur, loudest at the upper right sternal border,
with radiation toward the neck.”

Systolic Marmurs
Systolic murmurs are subdivided into systolic ejection murmurs, pansystolic murmurs, and
late systolic murmurs (Fig. 2-6). A systolic ejection murmur is typical of aortic or pul-
monic valve stenosis. It begins after the first heart sound and terminates before or during
S,, depending on its severity and whether the obstruction is of the aortic or pulmonic valve.
The shape of the murmur is of the crescendo—decrescendo type (i.e., its intensity rises and
then falls).
Examples
A. Ejection type al | * Aortic stenosis
¢ Pulmonary stenosis
S; S,
; ¢ Mitral re gurgitation
B. Pansystolic * Tricuspid regurgitation
(holos ys tolic) * Ventricular septal defect
S; S,
HGURE2-6. Cassif cation of systolic
mumnurs. Kection murmurs are crescendo—
decrescendo in conf guration (A), whereas
C. Late systolic Mh * Mitral valve prolapse pansystolic murmurs are uniform throughout
systole (B). Alate systolic murmur often follows
5, Click g a midsystolic click and suggests mitral (or
1 2 tricuspid) valve prolapse (©.
The Cardiac Gycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 37
Aortic The ejection murmur of aortic stenosis begins in
valve systole after S,, from which it is separated by a short
opens audible gap (Fig. 2-7). This gap corresponds to the
Aorta \ period of isovolumetric contraction of the left ventricle
(the period after the mitral valve has closed but before
! the aortic valve has opened). The murmur becomes
| | more intense as f ow increases across the aortic valve
during the rise in left ventricular pressure (crescendo).
Then, as the ventricle relaxes, forward f ow decreases
| and the murmur lessens in intensity (decrescendo) and
LV | finally ends prior to the aortic component of S,. The
| ! murmur may be immediately preceded by an ejection
; click, especially in mild forms of aortic stenosis.
Although the intensity of the murmur does not cor-
| | relate well with the severity of aortic stenosis, other
! features do. For example, the more severe the steno-
| | sis, the longer it takes to force blood across the valve,
I and the later the murmur peaks in systole (Fig. 2-8).
Also, as shown in Figure 2-8, as the severity of stenosis
S} ll S2 increases, the aortic component of S, softens because
the leaf ets become more rigidly fixed in place.
ee ; Aortic stenosis causes a high-frequency murmur,
HGURE 2-7. Systolic ejection murmur of aortic . . .
stenosis. There is a short delay between the frst ref ecting the sizable pressure gradient across the
heart sound (S;) and the onset of the murmur (frst valve. It is best heard in the “aortic area” at the second
dashed line). LV left ventricle; S,, second heart sound, and third right intercostal spaces close to the sternum
(see Fig. 2-2). The murmur typically radiates toward
the neck (the direction of turbulent blood f ow) but often can be heard in a wide distribution,
including the cardiac apex.

The murmur of pulmonic stenosis also begins after S;. It may be preceded by an ejection
click, but unlike aortic stenosis, it may extend beyond the A, sound. That is, if the stenosis
is severe, it will result in a very prolonged right ventricular ejection time, elongating the
murmur, which will continue beyond the closure of the aortic valve and end just before the
closure of the pulmonic valve (P;). Pulmonic stenosis is usually loudest at the second to third
left intercostal spaces close to the sternum. It does not radiate as widely as aortic stenosis, but
sometimes it is transmitted to the neck or left shoulder.

Young adults often have benign systolic ejection murmurs (also termed “innocent mur-
murs”) resulting from increased systolic fow across normal aortic and pulmonic valves. This
type of murmur often becomes softer or disappears when the patient sits upright.

Pansystolic (also termed holosystolic) murmurs are caused by regurgitation of blood
across an incompetent mitral or tricuspid valve or through a ventricular septal defect (see
Chapter 16). These murmurs are characterized by a uniform intensity throughout systole
(Fig. 2-6). In mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation, as soon as ventricular systolic pres-
sure exceeds atrial pressure (i.e., when S, occurs), there is immediate retrograde f ow across
the regurgitant valve. Thus, there is no gap between S, and the onset of these pansystolic
murmurs, in contrast to the systolic ejection murmurs discussed earlier. Similarly, there is no
significant gap between S, and the onset of the systolic murmur of a VSD, because left ven-
tricular systolic pressure exceeds right ventricular systolic pressure (and f ow occurs) quickly
after the onset of contraction.

The pansystolic murmur of advanced mitral regurgitation continues through the aortic clo-
sure sound because left ventricular pressure remains greater than that in the left atrium at the
time of aortic closure. The murmur is heard best at the apex, is high pitched and “blowing” in
quality, and often radiates toward the left axilla; its intensity does not change with respiration.
38 chapter 2
Tricuspid valve regurgitation is best heard along
the left lower sternal border. It generally radiates to
the right of the sternum and is high pitched and blow-
ing in quality. The intensity of the murmur increases A. Mild i] ll"
with inspiration because the negative intratho-
racic pressure induced during inspiration enhances S, A, P,
venous return to the heart. The latter augments right
ventricular stroke volume, thereby increasing the BE
amount of regurgitated blood.
The murmur of a VSD is heard best at the fourth to
sixth left intercostal spaces, is high pitched, and may
be associated with a palpable thrill. The intensity of | I:
the murmur does not increase with inspiration, nor B. Moderate
does it radiate to the axilla, which helps distinguish it Ay Pp
from tricuspid and mitral regurgitation, respectively. Of S, 2
note, the smaller the VSD, the greater the turbulence
of blood f ow between the left and right ventricles and
the louder the murmur. Some of the loudest murmurs
ever heard are those associated with small VSDs.
Late systolic murmurs begin in mid-to-late sys- C. Severe ll!
tole and continue to the end of systole (see Fig. 2-6).
The most common example is mitral regurgitation
caused by mitral valve prolapse—bowing of abnor- S; P,
mally redundant and elongated valve leaf ets into the FIGURE2-8. ‘The severity of aortic
left atrium during ventricular contraction. This mur- _ gtenosis affects the shape of the systolic
mur is usually preceded by a midsystolic click and is murmur and the heart sounds. A. In mild
described in Chapter 8. stenosis, an ejection click (EJ) is often
present, followed by an early peaking
. . crescendo—decrescendo murmur and a
Diastolic Murmurs normal aortic component of S, (A). B. As
Diastolic murmurs are divided into early decre- ot the raises becomes ure dehaed in
scendo murmurs and mid-to-late rumbling mur- systole and the intensity of Ay lessens.
murs (Fig. 2-9). Early diastolic murmurs result ‘The prolonged ventricular ejection time
from regurgitant fow through either the aortic or delays A, so that it merges with or occurs
pulmonic valve, with the former being much more _ after the pulmonic component of S, (P.);
common in adults. If produced by aortic valve regur- the ejection click may not be heard. C In
gitation, the murmur begins at A;, has a decrescendo severe stenosis, the murmur peaks very late
. in systole, and A, is usually absent because
shape, and terminates before the next S,. Because of immobility of the valve leaf ets. S,, first
diastolic relaxation of the left ventricle is rapid, a peart sound; S, second heart sound.
pressure gradient develops immediately between
the aorta and lower-pressured left ventricle in patients with aortic regurgitation, and the
murmur therefore displays its maximum intensity at its onset. Thereafter in diastole, as the
aortic pressure falls and the LV pressure increases (as blood regurgitates into the ventricle),
the gradient between the two chambers diminishes and the murmur decreases in intensity.
Aortic regurgitation is a high-pitched murmur, best heard using the diaphragm of the stetho-
scope along the left sternal border with the patient sitting, leaning forward, and exhaling.
Pulmonic regurgitation in adults is usually due to pulmonary arterial hypertension. It is an
early diastolic decrescendo murmur similar to that of aortic regurgitation, but it is best heard
in the pulmonic area (Fig. 2-2), and its intensity may increase with inspiration.
Mid-to-late diastolic murmurs result from either turbulent fow across a stenotic mitral
or tricuspid valve or less commonly from abnormally increased fow across a normal mitral
or tricuspid valve (see Fig. 2-9). If resulting from stenosis, the murmur begins after S, and is
The Cardiac Gycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 39
A. Early decrescendo | | | * Aortic regurgitation .
¢ Pulmonic regurgitation
S; S, S;
B. Mid-to-late | | | * Mild mitral or tricuspid stenosis
Si S, | S;
OS
C. Prolonged mid-to-late | | | * Severe mitral or tricuspid stenosis
S, Sa S,
OS
HIGURE 2-9. Cassif cation of diastolic murmurs. A. An early diastolic decrescendo murmur is typical of
aortic or pulmonic valve regurgitation. B. Md-to-late low-frequency rumbling murmurs are usually the result
of mitral or tricuspid valve stenosis and follow a sharp opening snap (OS). Presystolic accentuation of the
murmur occurs in patients in normal sinus rhythm because of the transient rise in atrial pressure during atrial
contraction. C In more severe mitral or tricuspid valve stenosis, the opening snap and diastolic murmur
commence earlier, and the murmur is prolonged. S,, frst heart sound; S,, second heart sound.
preceded by an opening snap. The shape of this murmur is unique. Following valvular open-
ing (and the OS), the murmur is at its loudest because the pressure gradient between the
atrium and ventricle is at its maximum. The murmur then decrescendos or disappears totally
during diastole as the transvalvular gradient decreases. The degree to which the murmur fades
depends on the severity of the stenosis. If the stenosis is severe, the murmur is prolonged; if the
stenosis is mild, the murmur disappears in mid-to-late diastole. Whether the stenosis is mild
or severe, the murmur intensifies at the end of diastole in patients in normal sinus rhythm,
when atrial contraction augments f ow (and turbulence) across the valve (see Fig. 2-9). Since
the pressure gradient across a stenotic mitral valve tends to be fairly low, the murmur of mitral
stenosis is low pitched and is heard best with the bell of the stethoscope at the apex, while the
patient lies in the left lateral decubitus position. The much less common murmur of tricuspid
stenosis is better auscultated at the lower sternum, near the xiphoid process.
Hyperdynamic states such as fever, anemia, hyperthyroidism, and exercise cause increased
f ow across the normal tricuspid and mitral valves and can therefore result in a diastolic mur-
mur. Similarly, in patients with advanced mitral regurgitation, the expected systolic murmur
can be accompanied by an additional diastolic murmur owing to the increased volume of
blood that must return across the valve to the left ventricle in diastole. Likewise, patients with
either tricuspid regurgitation or an atrial septal defect (see Chapter 16) have increased f ow
across the tricuspid valve, and may therefore display a diastolic fow murmur from that site.
Continuous Marmurs
Continuous murmurs are heard throughout the cardiac cycle. Such murmurs result from condi-
tions in which there is a persistent pressure gradient between two structures during both systole
and diastole. An example is the murmur of patent ductus arteriosus, in which there is an abnor-
mal congenital communication between the aorta and the pulmonary artery (see Chapter 16).
During systole, blood f ows from the high-pressure ascending aorta through the ductus into the
40 chapter 2
Continuous fi * Patent ductus arteriosus
S; S, S;
¢ Aortic stenosis and regurgitation
To-and-fro ii iy, | * Pulmonic stenosis and regurgitation
hh
S; S, S;

HGURE2-10. Acontinuous murmur peaks at, and extends through, the second heart sound (S,). A

to-and-fro murmur is not continuous; rather, there is a systolic component and a distinct diastolic component,

separated by S,. S,, frst heart sound.

lower-pressure pulmonary artery. During diastole, the aortic pressure remains greater than that

in the pulmonary artery and the f ow continues across the ductus. This murmur begins in early

systole, crescendos to its maximum at S,, then decrescendos until the next S, (Fig. 2-10).

The “to-and-fro” combined murmur in a patient with both aortic stenosis and aortic regur-
gitation could be mistaken for a continuous murmur (see Fig. 2-10). During systole, there is a
diamond-shaped ejection murmur, and during diastole, a decrescendo murmur. However, in
the case of a to-and-fro murmur, the sound does not extend through S, because it has discrete
systolic and diastolic components.

° Cardiac diseases often result in abnormal heart sounds and murmurs, which are clues to
the underlying pathophysiology.

e Systole refers to the phase of ventricular contraction, and diastole refers to the phase of ven-
tricular relaxation and filling.

e The normal cardiac cycle proceeds as follows: (1) during diastole, the mitral valve (MV)
is open, so that the left atrial (LA) and left ventricular (LV) pressures are equal; (2) in late
diastole, LA contraction causes a small rise in pressure in both the LA and LV; (3) after a
short delay, ventricular contraction causes the LV pressure to rise, and when the LV pres-
sure exceeds the LA pressure, the MV closes, contributing to the first heart sound (S,);

(4) as LV pressure rises above the aortic pressure, the aortic valve (AV) opens, a silent

event in a normal heart; (5) after contraction, as the ventricle relaxes and its pressure

falls below that of the aorta, the AV closes, contributing to the second heart sound (S,);

(6) when the LV pressure declines below that of the left atrium, the mitral valve opens,

and the cycle repeats.

° Extra systolic sounds include ejection clicks, indicating aortic or pulmonic stenosis or
dilatation of the aortic root or pulmonary artery, and mid-to-late clicks, indicating mitral or
tricuspid valve prolapse.

e Extra diastolic sounds include the opening snap (signifying mitral stenosis), the S; sound
(indicating heart failure or a volume overload state in older adults; an S; is a normal
sound in children and young adults), and the S, sound (indicating reduced ventricular
compliance).

* Common murmurs include systolic ejection murmurs from aortic or pulmonic stenosis,
pansystolic murmurs from mitral or tricuspid regurgitation, late systolic murmurs from mitral
valve prolapse, early diastolic murmurs from aortic or pulmonic regurgitation, and mid-to-
late diastolic murmurs from mitral stenosis.

° Tables 2-2 and 2-3 and Figure 2-11 summarize features of the heart sounds and murmurs
described in this chapter.
TABLE 2 -2

Sound Location Pitch Signif cance

Si Apex High Normal closure of mitral and tricuspid valves

S Base High Normal closure of aortic (A,) and pulmonic

(P;) valves
Extra systolic sounds
Kection clicks Aortic: apex and base High Aortic or pulmonic stenosis, or dilatation of
Pulmonic: base High aortic root or pulmonary artery
Md-to-late click Mtral: apex High Mitral or tricuspid valve prolapse
Tricuspid: LLSB High

Extra diastolic sounds

Opening snap Apex High Mitral stenosis

S; left-sided: apex Low Normal in children

Abnormal in adults: indicates heart failure
or volume overload state

Sy left-sided: apex Low Reduced ventricular compliance
a
LLSB, lower left sternal border.

TABLE 2 -3

Murmur Type Example Location and Radiation

Systolic ejection Aortic stenosis Second right intercostal space — neck (but may

radiate widely)
il Pulmonic stenosis Second to third left intercostal spaces
S; S,
Pansystolic Mitral regurgitation Apex — axilla
Tricuspid regurgitation Left lower sternal border — right lower sternal

S; S,

Late systolic Mitral valve prolapse Apex — axilla

S, S,

Early diastolic Aortic regurgitation Along left side of the sternum

| | Pulmonic regurgitation Upper left side of the sternum

S, Sj

Md-to-late diastolic Mitral stenosis Apex

S, S;
a
42 (chapter 2
Aortic area Pulmonic area
Ejection-type murmur Ejection-type murmur
e Aortic stenosis ¢ Pulmonic stenosis
° Flow murmur ag ¢ Flow murmur
a SSSA
Ss IS
SE EAS
Cee
"\ — \) > A) Left sternal border
Ze es SEY Early diastolic murmur
» CS eS ( ¢ Aortic re gurgitation
> — — 4) ° Pulmonie ree urgita tion
Y 3 ff \oT gurg
a vn, Vay
Or a LN, Ey J
Tricus pid area WIZ ATR SS rol
Pansystolic murmur » Q77, = in SS
* Tricuspid re gurgitation Rut JA —\ Key Mitral are a
¢ Ventricular septal defect Woy Po wy Pansystolic murmur
E rt = * Mitral regurgitation
Mid -to-late diastolic eC — >
“t0- |
murmur _ | -Mid-to-late diastolic murmur
* Tricuspid stenosis _ _ * Mitral stenosis
* Atrial septal defect
HGURE2-11. Locations of maximum intensity of common murmurs.
Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Henry Jung, MD; Nicole Martin, MD;
Oscar Benavidez, MD; Bradley S. Marino, MD; and Allan Goldblatt, MD.
Additional Reading
Bickley LS. Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and History Orient JM. Sapira’s Art and Science of Bedside Diagnosis.
Taking. llth ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
g p PP
Wilkins; 2013. 2010.
Constant J. Essentials of Bedside Cardiology. 2nd ed. Totowa, Simel DL, Rennie D. The Rational Clinical Examination:
NJ: Humana Press; 2003. Evidence-Based Clinical Diagnosis. New York, NY: McGraw-
LeBlond RF, DeGowin RL, Brown DD. DeGowin’s Diagnostic Hill; 2009.
Examination. 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.
‘ae
Cardiac Imaging and| 4
ging and) |
e e : 2
Catheterization |. |
Diana M. Lopez
Patricia Challender Come .
< .
-_
—
Chapter Outline I maging plays a central role in the assessment of cardiac
function and pathology. Traditional modalities such as
Card “ Badiograp ity chest radiography, echocardiography (echo), cardiac catheter-
Cardiac Silhouette —— ch anoi h d nuclear j : funda |
Pulmonary Manifestations of ization with angiography, and nuclear imaging are Tundamenta
rE, in the diagnosis and management of cardiovascular diseases.
Echocardiography These procedures are increasingly supplemented by newer tech-
Ventricular Assessment niques, including computed tomography (CI) and magnetic
Valvular Testons resonance imaging (MRI).
ESET prlery Lscace This chapter presents an overview of imaging studies as
Cardiomyopathy : . .
ne they are used to assess the cardiovascular disorders described
Pericardial Disease a ——
Cardiac Catheterization later in this book. On frst reading, it would be benef cial to
Measurement of Pressure familiarize yourself with the information but not to memorize
Measurement of Blood Flow the details. This chapter is meant as a reference for diagnosis
uent chapters.
Qntrast Angiography i
Nuclear Imaging
Assessment of Myocardial CARDIAC RADIOGRAPHY
Perfusion
Radionuclide Ventriculography The extent of penetration of x-rays through the body is
Assessment of Myocardial inversely proportional to tissue density. Air-flled tissues,
Metabolism such as the lung, absorb few x-rays and expose the under-
@mputed Tomography lying flm (or electronic recording sensor), causing it to
Mbenetic Resonance Imaging appear black. In contrast, dense materials, such as bone,
absorb more radiation and appear white or radiopaque. For
a boundary to show between two structures, they must dif-
44 chapter 3

Frontal and lateral radiographs are rou-
tinely used to assess the heart and lungs | we
(Fig. 3-1). The frontal view is usually a
posterior—anterior image in which the Te :

X-rays are transmitted from behind (i.e., swe et Ao\ w
posterior to) the patient, pass through the | 4 - LAA
body, and are then captured by the film :
(or electronic sensor) placed against the Py - a
anterior chest. This positioning places OS i
the heart close to the x-ray recording film ie
plate so that its image is only minimally
distorted, allowing for an accurate assess- a B
ment of size. In the standard lateral view,
the patient’s left side is placed against the
film plate and the x-rays pass through the : ;
body from right to left. The frontal radio- * 4 m
graph is useful for assessing the size of the a ie ,
left ventricle, left atrial appendage, pulmo- * wn OS ee,
nary artery, aorta, and superior vena cava; ‘ea :
the lateral view evaluates right ventricular RA
size, posterior borders of the left atrium eh bo
and ventricle, and the anteroposterior | - Ss
diameter of the thorax. \ w/ \Ne, “
Cc D
Cardiac Silhouette HGURE3-1. Posteroanterior (A and B) and lateral
Chest radiographs are useful to evaluate cardiopulmonary disease illustrating cardiac.
the size of heart chambers and the pul- chambers and valves. AQ aorta; AV azygos vein;
monary consequences of cardiac disease. [VC inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LAA, left
Alterations in chamber size are reflected atrial appendage; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LV, left
by changes in the cardiac silhouette. In ventricle; MPA, main pulmonary artery; MY mitral valve;
the frontal view of adults, an enlarged 4 right atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RY right
heart is identified by a cardiothoracic ventricle; SVG superior vena cava; TV tricuspid valve.
ratio (the maximum width of the heart (Reprinted trom Come PG ed. Diagnostic Cardiology:
i ; ; ; Noninvasive Imaging Techniques. Philadelphia, PA: J.B.
divided by the maximum internal diam- Lippincott; 1985, with permission.)
eter of the thoracic cage) of greater
than 50%.

In certain situations, the cardiac silhouette inaccurately ref ects heart size. For example, an
elevated diaphragm, or narrow chest anteroposterior diameter, may cause the silhouette to
expand transversely such that the heart appears larger than its actual dimensions. Therefore,
the chest anteroposterior diameter should be assessed on the lateral view before concluding
the heart is truly enlarged. The presence of a pericardial effusion around the heart can also
widen the cardiac silhouette because fuid and myocardial tissue affect x-ray penetration
similarly.

Radiographs can depict dilatation of individual cardiac chambers. Of note, concentric ven-
tricular hypertrophy alone (i.e., without dilatation) may not result in radiographic abnor-
malities, because it generally occurs at the expense of the cavity’s internal volume and
produces little or no change in overall cardiac size. Major causes of chamber and great ves-
sel dilatation include heart failure, valvular lesions, abnormal intracardiac and extracardiac
communications (shunts), and certain pulmonary disorders. Because dilatation takes time to
Cardiac Imaging and Gatheterization 45
a
‘ 4
; oo * e
HGURE3-2. Posteroanterior chest . f
radiograph of a patient with severe Fa v :
mitral stenosis and secondary pulmonary oy ,
vascular congestion. The radiograph shows a »-
prominent left atrial appendage (arrowheads) —- ~. ,
with consequent straightening of the left 7 *.~3 a »
heart border and suggestion of a double - A
density right cardiac border (arrows) produced oe , ‘
by the enlarged left atrium. The aortic )
silhouette is small, which suggests chronic
low cardiac output. Radiographic signs é
of pulmonary vascular congestion include
increased caliber of upper-zone pulmonary
vessel markings and decreased caliber of \
lower-zone vessels. .
develop, recent lesions, such as acute mitral valve insufficiency, may present without appar-
ent cardiac enlargement.

The pattern of chamber enlargement may suggest specific disease entities. For example,
dilatation of the left atrium and right ventricle, accompanied by signs of pulmonary hyperten-
sion, suggests mitral stenosis (Fig. 3-2). In contrast, dilatation of the pulmonary artery and
right heart chambers, but without enlargement of the left-sided heart dimensions, can be seen
in patients with pulmonary vascular obstruction, in those with increased pulmonary artery
blood f ow (e.g., due to an atrial septal defect), or in those with pulmonary hypertension of
diverse causes (Fig. 3-3).

Chest radiographs can also detect dilatation of the aorta. Causes of aortic enlargement
include aneurysm, dissection, and aortic valve disease (Fig. 3-4). Normal aging and athero-
sclerosis may also cause the aorta to become dilated and tortuous.

Pulmonary Manifestations of Heart Disease
The appearance of the pulmonary vasculature ref ects abnormalities of pulmonary arterial
and venous pressures and pulmonary blood f ow. Increased pulmonary venous pressure,
as occurs in left heart failure, causes increased vascular markings, redistribution of blood
fow from the bases to the apices of the lungs (termed cephalization of vessels), intersti-
tial edema, and alveolar edema (Fig. 3-5). Cephalization appears as an increase in the
number or width of vascular markings at the apex (Fig. 3-5A). Interstitial edema occurs
as pulmonary congestion progresses, and the connective tissue spaces become thickened
with fuid (Fig. 3-5B). Kerley B lines (short horizontal parallel lines at the periphery of
the lungs adjacent to the pleura, most often at the lung bases) depict fuid in interlobular
spaces that results from interstitial edema (Fig. 3-5C). When fuid accumulates in the
air spaces, alveolar forms of pulmonary edema produce opacity radiating from the hilar
46 Chapter 3
i : - - _
>” .
Ne
» - 4
4 ; |
eA ig
‘ 2 HGURE3-3. Posteroanterior chest
radiograph of a patient with pulmonary
hypertension secondary to an atrial septal
; defect. Radiographic signs of pulmonary
hypertension include pulmonary artery
dilatation (black arrows; compare with the
appearance of left atrial appendage dilatation
, in Fig. 3-2) and large central pulmonary
arteries (white arrows) associated with
small peripheral vessels (a pattern known as
peripheral pruning).
region bilaterally (known as a “butterfy” pattern) and air bronchograms may be seen
(Fig. 3-5D). Fluid accumulation in the pleural spaces in heart failure (1.e., pleural effu-
sions) is manifest by blunting of the costophrenic angles (the angle between the ribs and
the diaphragm).
~ =
~~
ic x +
F _< ve
alll.
‘" x i) HGURE3-4. Posteroanterior chest radiograph
Pa Res of a patient with aortic stenosis and
oe hae insuff ciency secondary to a bicuspid aortic
valve. In addition to poststenotic dilatation of
a 7 ; the ascending aorta (black arrows), the transverse
"e aorta (white arrow) is prominent.
Cardiac Imaging and Catheterization 47
* - ; o 2 ~ e
Vi 4 t >
: i r J el {
” d 7 :
} |
a me ° ’ q }
A B
5 i]
. ] r
™” i .
d y
Li t
A Fy |
‘ -- -
i, ’ % / : 4%
f] » £
. 7
Cc D
HGURE3-5. Posteroanterior radiographs of patients with heart failure (HF). A. Early manifestations of HF
include upper zone redistribution (cephalization) of vessels (green arrows); cardiomegaly is present. B. More
pronounced manifestations of HF include interstitial edema with pulmonary vascular markings throughout the
lung felds owing to edematous interlobular septae. Fluid-associated thickening of bronchial walls is visualized
as peribronchiolar cuff ng (red arrow). C Enlarged view of Kerley B lines (yellow arrows) at the periphery of the
lower left lung feld. D. Severe HF manifest by diffuse alveolar edema. Air bronchograms (blue arrows) occur
when the radiolucent bronchial tree is contrasted with opaque edematous tissue. Patients with HF often have
a combination of interstitial and alveolar edema. (Gourtesy of Gillian Lieberman, MD, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, MA)
Changes in pulmonary blood f ow may also alter the appearance of the pulmonary vessels.
For example, focal oligemia (reduction in the size of blood vessels due to decreased blood
f ow) is occasionally observed distal to a pulmonary embolism (termed the Westermark sign).
The finding of enlarged central pulmonary arteries, but small peripheral vessels (termed
peripheral pruning), suggests pulmonary hypertension (see Fig. 3-3).
Table 3-1 summarizes the major radiographic findings in common forms of cardiac
disease.
48 chapter 3
Disorder Findings
Qngestive heart failure * @phalization of vessels
* Interstitial edema (peribronchial cuffng, Kerley B lines)
° Alveolar edema (air bronchograms)
* Pleural effusions
Pulmonic valve stenosis * Poststenotic dilatation of pulmonary artery
Aortic valve stenosis * Poststenotic dilatation of ascending aorta
Aortic regurgitation ° Left ventricular dilatation
* Dilated aorta
Mitral stenosis ° Left atrial dilatation
* Signs of pulmonary venous congestion
Mitral regurgitation ° Left atrial dilatation
° Left ventricular dilatation
* Signs of pulmonary venous congestion in acute MR (see Chapter 8)
ee
KCHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Echocardiography plays an essential role in the diagnosis and serial evaluation of many car-
diac disorders. It is safe, noninvasive, and relatively inexpensive. High-frequency (ultrasonic)
waves generated by a piezoelectric element travel through the body and are ref ected at inter-
faces where there are differences in the acoustic impedance of adjacent tissues. The ref ected
waves return to the transducer and are recorded. The machine measures the time elapsed
between the initiation and reception of the sound waves, allowing it to calculate the distance
between the transducer and each anatomic ref ecting surface. Images are then constructed
from these calculations.

Three types of imaging are routinely performed during an echocardiographic examina-
tion: M-mode, two-dimensional (2D), and Doppler. Each type of imaging can be performed
from various body locations. Most commonly, transthoracic studies are performed, in which
images are obtained by placing the transducer on the surface of the chest. When greater struc-
tural detail is required, transesophageal imaging is performed.

M-mode echocardiography, the oldest form of cardiac ultrasonography, provides data from
only one ultrasonic beam and is now rarely used by itself. It supplements the other modalities
to provide accurate measurements of wall thicknesses and timing of valve movements.

In 2D echocardiography, multiple ultrasonic beams are transmitted from the transducer
through a wide arc. The returning signals are integrated to produce 2D images of the heart
on a video monitor. As a result, this technique depicts anatomic relationships and defines
the movement of cardiac structures relative to one another. Wall and valve motion abnor-
malities, and many types of intracardiac masses (e.g., vegetations, thrombi, tumors), can be
depicted.

Each 2D plane (Fig. 3-6) delineates only part of a given cardiac structure. Optimal evalua-
tion of the entire heart is achieved by using combinations of views. In transthoracic echocar-
diography (TTE), in which the transducer is placed against the patient’s skin, these include
the parasternal long axis, parasternal short axis, apical views, and subcostal views. The para-
sternal long-axis view is recorded with the transducer in the third or fourth intercostal space
to the left of the sternum. This view is particularly useful for evaluation of the left atrium,
mitral valve, left ventricle, and left ventricular outf ow tract (LVOT), which includes the aortic
valve and adjacent interventricular septum. To obtain parasternal short-axis views, the trans-
ducer is rotated 90 degrees from its position for the long-axis view. The short-axis images
Cardiac Imaging and Catheterization 49
Interventricular septum
) | RV
y 7 Aortic
LV valve
Mitra |
va lve
A ™ LV posterior wall
RV
LV
HIGURE3-6. Transthoracic two- B
dimensional echocardiographic views.
A. Parasternal long-axis view. B. Parasternal
short-axis view. Notice that the left
ventricle appears circular in this view, while RV Lv
the right ventricle is crescent shaped. C
Apical four-chamber view. Ao, aorta; LA, . . Mitra
left atrium; LV left ventricle; RA, right & Teus pid ay lve
atrium; RV right ventricle. (Mbdifed from
Sahn DJ, Anderson E Two-Dimensional
Anatomy of the Heart. New York, NY John
Wiley & Sons; 1982.) c
depict transverse planes of the heart. Several different levels are imaged to assess the aortic
valve, mitral valve, and left ventricular wall motion.

Apical TTE views are produced when the transducer is placed at the point of maximal api-
cal impulse. The apical four-chamber view evaluates the mitral and tricuspid valves as well
as the atrial and ventricular chambers, including the motion of the lateral, septal, and apical
left ventricular walls. The apical two-chamber view shows only the left side of the heart, and
it depicts movement of the anterior, inferior, and apical walls.

In some patients, such as those with obstructive airways disease, the parasternal and api-
cal views do not adequately show cardiac structures because the excessive underlying air
attenuates the acoustic signal. In such patients, the subcostal view, in which the transducer is
placed inferior to the rib cage, may provide a better ultrasonic window.

Doppler imaging depicts blood f ow direction and velocity and identifies regions of vascu-
lar turbulence. Additionally, it permits estimation of pressure gradients within the heart and
great vessels. Doppler studies are based on the physical principle that waves ref ected from
a moving object undergo a frequency shift according to the moving object’s velocity relative
to the source of the waves. Color fow mapping converts the Doppler signals to a scale of
colors that represent direction, velocity, and turbulence of blood fow in a semiquantitative
way. The colors are superimposed on 2D images and show the location of stenotic and regur-
gitant valvular lesions and of abnormal communications within the heart and great vessels.
For example, Doppler echocardiography in a patient with mitral regurgitation shows a jet of
retrograde f ow into the left atrium during systole (Fig. 3-7).
50 chapter 3
Sound frequency shifts are converted by the echo machine into
blood fow velocity measurements by the following relationship:
: fs c
. = v=
> et 2f, (cos ®)
. cee & Z in which v equals the blood f ow velocity (m/sec); fs, the Doppler fre-
= ef == ts quency shift (kHz); c, the velocity of sound in body tissue (m/sec); fo,
= : the frequency of the sound pulse emitted from the transducer (MHz);
. RA ee and 0, the angle between the transmitted sound pulse and the mean
, LA i axis of the blood f ow being assessed.
~— Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) uses a miniaturized
= Sn “oe
= transducer mounted at the end of a modified endoscope to trans-
mit and receive ultrasound waves from within the esophagus, thus
producing very clear images of the neighboring cardiac structures
HGURE3-7. Doppler color f ow . . .

. . er (Fig. 3-8) and much of the thoracic aorta. Modern probes permit

mapping of mitral regurgitation . . . . . : .
(MR). The color Doppler multiplanar imaging and Doppler interrogation. TEE is particularly
image, recorded in systole, is helpful in the assessment of aortic and atrial abnormalities, con-
superimposed on an apical four- ditions that are less well visualized by conventional transthoracic
chamber view. The color Doppler echo imaging. For example, TEE is more sensitive than transthoracic
signal filling the left atrium (LA) echo for the detection of thrombus within the left atrial append-
indicates retrograde f ow of MR age (Fig. 3-9). The proximity of the esophagus to the heart makes
from the left ventricle (LV) across . . . . .

; ; TEE imaging particularly advantageous in patients for whom trans-
the mitral valve (arrow). RA, right ; : ; . ;
atrium: RV right ventricle. thoracic echo images are unsatisfactory (e.g., those with chronic

obstructive lung disease).

TEE is also advantageous in the evaluation of patients with pros-
thetic heart valves. During standard transthoracic imaging, artificial mechanical valves ref ect
a large portion of ultrasound waves, thus interfering with visualization of more posterior struc-
tures (termed acoustic shadowing). TEE aids visualization in such patients and is therefore
the most sensitive noninvasive technique for evaluating perivalvular leaks. In addition, TEE is

= A. Cross-sectional
LA view of aortic
Esophagus valve
NL
RA R

A RV
A .

f | C. Short axis view

ZF. of left venticle
B f
IN ; LV
\ RV
» | RA @ . FIGURE3-8. Transesophageal
B. Long axis view ; _—-
\¢ LA of cardiac echocardiographic views. lA,
C chambers left atrium; LV left ventricle; RA,
right atrium; RV right ventricle; N,
LV noncoronary cusp of aortic valve; L, left
coronary cusp of aortic valve; R, right
RV coronary cusp of aortic valve.
Cardiac Imaging and Catheterization 51
s
an.
= 22 - J
f “ f= Thrombus
A B
HGURE3-9. Echocardiographic imaging of an intracardiac thrombus. A. Transesophageal echocardiographic
image demonstrates thrombus within the left atrial appendage. (Courtesy of Scott Streckenbach, MD,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.) B Schematic drawing of same image. LA, left atrium; LAA, left
atrial appendage.
more sensitive than TTE for detecting features of endocarditis, such as vegetations and myo-
cardial abscesses.

TEE is commonly used to evaluate patients with cerebral ischemic events (1.e., strokes) of
unexplained etiology, because it can identify cardiovascular sources of embolism with high
sensitivity. These etiologies include intracardiac thrombi or tumors, atherosclerotic debris
within the aorta, and valvular vegetations. TEE is also highly sensitive and specific for the
detection of aortic dissection.

In the operating room, TEE permits immediate evaluation after surgical repair of cardiac
lesions. In addition, imaging of ventricular wall motion can identify periods of myocardial
ischemia during surgery.

New ultrasound modalities include 3D echocardiography and intracardiac echocardiog-
raphy. The spatial reconstructions afforded by 3D echo are of particular benefit in the assess-
ment of valvular defects, intracardiac masses, and congenital malformations. Intracardiac
echo utilizes a transducer mounted on a catheter to provide imaging during interventional
procedures in the cardiac catheterization laboratory.

Contrast echocardiography is sometimes used to supplement standard imaging to evalu-
ate for abnormal intracardiac shunts. In this technique, often called a “bubble study,” an
echocardiographic contrast agent (e.g., agitated saline) is rapidly injected into a peripheral
vein. Using standard imaging, the contrast can be visualized passing through the cardiac
chambers. Normally, there is rapid opacification of the right-sided chambers, but because
the contrast is filtered out (harmlessly) in the lungs, it does not reach the left-sided cham-
bers. However, in the presence of an intracardiac shunt with abnormal right-to-left heart
blood f ow, or in the presence of an intrapulmonary shunt, bubbles of contrast will appear
in the left-sided chambers as well. Newer perf uorocarbon-based contrast agents have been
developed with sufficiently small particle size to intentionally pass through the pulmonary
circulation. These agents are used to opacify the left ventricular cavity and, via the coronary
arteries, the myocardium, enabling superior assessment of LV contraction and myocardial
perfusion.

Echocardiographic techniques can identify valvular lesions, complications of coro-
nary artery disease (CAD), septal defects, intracardiac masses, cardiomyopathy, ven-
tricular hypertrophy, pericardial disease, aortic disease, and congenital heart disease.
52 chapter 3
“=o ar)
= : = = ~~ LJ
= a
Yl bas S ' -_ - F . = >, - — :
LV = LV —_
LVOT
3S —— “ mo > r al ,
~ a ~ 5 —
= LA = LA
~ = =
— = —_ — ~ ee “ee a
A B
HGURE3-10. Left ventricular outf ow tract (LVOD obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy—
parastemal long-axis view. Notice that the interventricular septum (S) is thicker and more echogenic than the
posterior wall (P). A. Before ventricular contraction, the LVOM is only slightly narrowed. B During contraction,
the rapidly f owing blood through the LVI incites a Venturi effect and abnormally draws the mitral valve
anteriorly toward the hypertrophied septum (arrow), creating a functional obstruction. LA, left atrium; LY left
ventricle.
Typical evaluation includes assessment of cardiac chamber sizes, wall thicknesses, wall
motion, valvular function, blood fow, and intracardiac hemodynamics. A few of these
topics are highlighted here.
Echocardiography allows measurement of ventricular wall thickness and mass (Fig. 3-10)
and calculation of the ejection fraction, a measure of contractile function (see Chapter 9).
Furthermore, 2D echocardiography depicts regional ventricular wall motion abnormalities, a
sign of CAD, and displays right ventricular function qualitatively.

Diastolic dysfunction (e.g., caused by ischemic disease, ventricular hypertrophy, or restric-
tive cardiomyopathy; see Chapter 9) can be evaluated by Doppler techniques. For example,
Doppler tissue imaging is a modality that can readily record the maximum velocity of mitral
annular movement in early diastole, an indicator of the left ventricle’s ability to relax nor-
mally. Doppler measurement of f ow velocity across the mitral valve in early, compared with
late, diastole also provides information about diastolic function.

Echocardiography can determine underlying causes of valvular abnormalities, and Doppler
imaging quantitates the degree of valvular stenosis and regurgitation. The pressure gradient
across a stenotic valve can be calculated from the maximum blood f ow velocity (v) measured
distal to the valve, using the simplified Bernoulli equation:

Pressure gradient =4 x v”
Cardiac Imaging and Gtheterization 53
@ (7) As an example, if the peak velocity recorded dis-
tal to a stenotic aortic valve is 5 m/sec, then the
calculated peak pressure gradient across the valve =
4x 5*= 100 mm Hg.
Other calculations permit noninvasive determina-
V2 tion of the cross-sectional area of stenotic valves. The
continuity equation is often used to calculate aortic
AI Ab valve area. This equation assumes that blood f ow (F,
expressed in cc/sec) is the same at the aortic valve
ALX VI = A2 x V2 orifice (AV) as at a neighboring position along the
FIGURE 3-11. The continuity equation. Within fow stream (e.g., in the LVOT):
a closed fow stream, the volume rate of f ow at
any point (calculated as the cross-sectional area Fivor = Fay
at that site multiplied by the fow velocity at the . . .
same location) is equal to the volume rate of fow As shown in Figure 3-11, blood fow at any posi-
at sequential points. Thus, cross-sectional area and tion along a f ow stream can also be expressed as the
velocity at any location are inversely proportional product of the Doppler velocity (V, in cm/sec) and
to one another. Here, location 2 is narrower than cross-sectional area (A, in cm’) at that level. If loca-
location 1. Therefore, the velocity at location 2 must tion 1 in Figure 3-11 represents a position in the LVOT
me greater for the same volume to pass per unit and location 2 represents the aortic valve, then
ime.
Avvor * Vivor = Aayv * Vay

The cross-sectional area of the LVOT (Ajyor) is calculated simply as a(d/2)*, where d repre-
sents the LVOT diameter, measured from the parasternal long-axis view. The velocities (V,yor
and Vay) are measured by Doppler interrogation, from the apical four-chamber view. The
equation can then be solved for the aortic valve area (Any):

Awy _— Awvor * Vivor
Vay

Color Doppler analysis provides a qualitative assessment of the severity of regurgitant valve
lesions. In mitral regurgitation (see Fig. 3-7), for example, the ratio of the regurgitant jet color
Doppler area to the entire left atrial area has traditionally been used to classify the regurgita-
tion as mild, moderate, or severe. More quantitative evaluation of mitral regurgitation can now
be performed by what is known as the proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) method. This
technique uses advanced color Doppler techniques to calculate the regurgitant volume and
effective regurgitant orifice area, two values that predict clinical outcomes in patients with
chronic mitral regurgitation.

@ronary Artery Disease
Echocardiography demonstrates ventricular wall motion abnormalities associated with
infarcted or ischemic myocardium. The location and degree of abnormal systolic contrac-
tion and decreased systolic wall thickening indicate the extent of an infarction and implicate
the responsible coronary artery. Echocardiography also detects complications of infarction
including thrombus formation, papillary muscle rupture, ventricular septal rupture, and
aneurysm.

Although echocardiography can depict those consequences of CAD, transthoracic echo
resolution in adults is insufficient to satisfactorily image the coronary arteries themselves.
However, stress echocardiography is a technique that aids in the diagnosis of CAD. This
technique visualizes left ventricular regional wall motion abnormalities that are induced by
exercise, or the infusion of specific pharmacologic agents (e.g., dobutamine), as a sign of
myocardial ischemia (see Chapter 6).
54 chapter 3
Cardiomyopathies are heart muscle disorders that include dilated, hypertrophic, and restric-
tive forms (see Chapter 10). Echocardiography can distinguish these and permits assessment
of the severity of systolic and diastolic dysfunction. For example, Figure 3-10 depicts asym-
metrically thickened ventricular walls in a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Two-dimensional echocardiography can identify abnormalities in the pericardial cavity
(e.g., excessive pericardial fuid and tumor). Tamponade and constrictive pericarditis, the
main complications of pericardial disease (see Chapter 14), are associated with particular
echocardiographic abnormalities. In tamponade, the increased intrapericardial pressure com-
presses the cardiac chambers and results in diastolic “collapse” of the right atrium and right
ventricle (Fig. 3-12). Constrictive pericarditis is associated with increased thickness of the
pericardial echo, abnormal patterns of diastolic left ventricular wall motion, alterations in
pulmonary and hepatic venous f ow patterns, and exaggerated changes in mitral and tricuspid
valve inf ow velocities during respiration.
Table 3-2 summarizes the echocardiographic features of common cardiac diseases.
RV. a
LV — y
PE = ‘ —— :
| : Zz ~~ | — “a \
— : JPEG f ‘ f — =
ee 4 et wl =
A B
Liver =. -*; NG
RA
> LV = ce
er =
Cc D
HGURE3-12. Echocardiogram of a patient with a pericardial effusion causing cardiac tamponade.
A. Parasternal long-axis image showing a large pericardial effusion (PE) surrounding the heart. This frame
was obtained in systole and shows normal appearance of the left (LV) and right (RV) ventricles during that
phase. B Same image as (A), but this frame was obtained in early diastole and shows collapse of the RV free
wall (arrow) due to compression by the effusion. C Subcostal view, obtained in systole, demonstrating the
PE surrounding the right atrium (RA), RV left atrium (LA), and LV D. Same image as (O, obtained during
diastole, showing inward collapse of the RA (arrow).
Cardiac Imaging and Gatheterization 55
Disorder Findings
Valvular lesions
Mtral stenosis * Fnlarged left atrium

* Thickened mitral valve leaf ets

* Decreased movement and separation of mitral valve leaf ets

* Decreased mitral valve orifice

Mtral regurgitation * Enlarged left atrium (if chronic)
° Enlarged left ventricle (if chronic)
° Systolic f ow from left ventricle into left atrium by Doppler
Aortic stenosis * Thickened aortic valve cusps
* Decreased valve orifice
* Increased left ventricular wall thickness
Aortic regurgitation * Enlarged left ventricle
e Abnormalities of aortic valve or aortic root
left ventricular function
Myocardial infarction and complications * Abnormal regional ventricular wall motion

° Thrombus within left ventricle

° Aneurysm of ventricular wall

* Septal rupture (abnormal Doppler f ow)

* Papillary muscle rupture

Cardiomyopathies
Dilated * Fnlarged ventricular chamber sizes
* Decreased systolic contraction
Hypertrophic * Normal or decreased ventricular chamber sizes
° Increased ventricular wall thickness
* Diastolic dysfunction (assessed by Doppler)
Restrictive * Normal or decreased ventricular chamber sizes

° Increased ventricular wall thickness

* Ventricular contractile function may be abnormal

* Diastolic dysfunction (assessed by Doppler)

* Fnlarged atria (often markedly so)
a
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION

To diagnose many cardiovascular abnormalities, intravascular catheters are inserted to mea-
sure pressures in the heart chambers, to determine cardiac output and vascular resistances,
and to inject radiopaque material to examine heart structures and blood f ow. In 1929, Werner
Forssmann performed the first cardiac catheterization, on himself, thus ushering in the era of
invasive cardiology. Much of what is known about the pathophysiology of valvular heart dis-
ease and congestive heart failure comes from decades of subsequent hemodynamic research
in the cardiac catheterization laboratory.
Measurement of Pressure

Before catheterization of an artery or vein, the patient is mildly sedated, and a local anes-
thetic is used to numb the skin site of catheter entry. The catheter, attached to a pres-
sure transducer outside the body, is then introduced into the appropriate blood vessel. To
measure pressures in the right atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary artery, a catheter is
56 Chapter 3
Aorta
Z> PCW
 fioo-140 , 2-10
W 90 yom
PA
RA 15-30 HGURE3-13. Diagrams indicating
4-12 normal pressures in the cardiac
LV chambers and great vessels. The top
2-8 100-140 f gure shows the normal anatomic
RV “3-12 relationship of the cardiac chambers
and great vessels, whereas the f gure
ss on the bottom shows a simplif ed
- schematic to clarify the pressure
relationships. Numbers indicate
pressures in mm Hg. LA left atrial
mean pressure; LV left ventricular
pressure; PA, pulmonary artery
RA RV PA Lungs LA LV Aorta pressure; PCW pulmonary capillary
7-8 15-30 15-30 PCW 2-10 100-140 ~ 100-140 wedge mean pressure; RA, right atrial
_ 2-8 4—12 2-10 3-12 60-90 mean pressure; RV right ventricular
pressure.
inserted into a femoral, brachial, or jugular vein. Pressures in the aorta and left ventricle
are measured via catheters inserted into a radial, brachial, or femoral artery. Once in the
blood vessel, the catheter is guided by fuoroscopy (continuous x-ray images) to the area of
study, where pressure measurements are made. Figure 3-13 depicts normal intracardiac and
intravascular pressures.

The measurement of right heart pressures is performed with a specialized balloon-tipped
catheter (a common version of which is known as the Swan—Ganz catheter) that is advanced
through the right side of the heart with the aid of normal blood f ow, and into the pulmonary
artery. As it travels through the right side of the heart, recorded pressure measurements iden-
tify the catheter tip’s position (see Box 3-1).
ee

BOX3-1 — Intracardiac Pressure Tracings

When a catheter is inserted into a systemic vein and advanced into the right side of the heart,

each cardiac chamber produces a characteristic pressure curve. It is important to distinguish these

recordings from one another to localize the position of the catheter tip and to derive appropriate

physiologic information.
ECG, OA
, Right ventricle Pulmonary artery
20 |
Pulmonary capillary wedge
av
10
Right atrium
ac V
y
Time
Cardiac Imaging and Gatheterization 57
a

BOX3-1 = Intracardiac Pressure Tracings (continued)

The normal right atrial (RA) pressure demonstrates three positive def ections (see the figure
in Box 2.1 for an enlarged view): the a wave ref ects RA contraction at the end of diastole, the
c wave results from bulging of the tricuspid valve toward the right atrium as it closes in early
systole, and the v wave represents passive filling of the right atrium from the systemic veins
during systole, when the tricuspid valve is closed. The downward def ection that follows the c wave
is known as the x descent, and the downward def ection after the v wave is called the y descent.

Often the a and c waves merge so that only two major positive def ections are seen. In patients

with atrial fibrillation, the a wave is absent because there is no organized left atrial contraction.

As the catheter is advanced into the right ventricle (RV), a dramatic increase in systolic
pressure is seen. The RVsystolic waveform is characterized by a rapid upstroke and downstroke. In
diastole, there is a gradual continuous increase in RVpressure as the chamber fills with blood.

As the catheter is moved forward into the pulmonary artery (PA), the systolic pressure remains
the same as that in the RV(as long as there is no obstruction to RVoutf ow, such as pulmonic
valve stenosis). However, three characteristics of the recording indicate entry into the pulmonary
artery: (1) the PA diastolic pressure is higher than that of the RV, (2) the descending systolic
portion of the PA tracing inscribes a dicrotic wave, a small transient pressure increase that occurs
after the systolic peak and is related to pulmonic valve closure; and (3) the diastolic portion of
the PA tracing is downsloping compared with the upsloping RV diastolic pressure.

Further advancement of the catheter into a branch of the pulmonary artery results in the
pulmonary capillary wedge (PCW) tracing, which ref ects the left atrial pressure (Fig. 3-14). Its
characteristic shape is similar to the RA tracing, but the pressure values are usually higher, and
the tracing is often less clear (with the c wave not observed) because of damped transmission
through the capillary vessels.

Right Atrial Pressure

Right atrial pressure is equal to the central venous pressure (estimated by the jugular venous
pressure on physical examination) because no obstructing valves impede blood return from
the central veins into the right atrium. Similarly, right atrial pressure normally equals right
ventricular pressure during diastole because the right heart functions as a “common cham-
ber” when the tricuspid valve is open. The mean right atrial pressure is reduced when there is
intravascular volume depletion. It is elevated in right ventricular failure, right-sided valvular
disease, and cardiac tamponade (in which the cardiac chambers are surrounded by high-
pressure pericardial f uid; see Chapter 14).

Certain abnormalities cause characteristic changes in individual components of the right
atrial (and therefore jugular venous) pressure (Table 3-3). For example, a prominent a wave
is seen in tricuspid stenosis and right ventricular hypertrophy. In these conditions, the right
atrium contracts vigorously against the obstructing tricuspid valve or stiffened right ventricle,
respectively, generating a prominent pressure wave. Similarly, amplified “cannon” a waves
may be produced by conditions of atrioventricular dissociation (see Chapter 12), when the
right atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve. A prominent v wave is observed in
tricuspid regurgitation because normal right atrial filling is augmented by the regurgitated
blood in systole.

Right Ventricular Pressure
Right ventricular systolic pressure is increased by pulmonic valve stenosis or pulmonary
hypertension. Right ventricular diastolic pressure increases when the right ventricle is sub-
jected to pressure or volume overload and may be a sign of right heart failure.
58 chapter 3
Chamber and Measurement Quses
Right atrial pressure * Right ventricular failure
* Grrdiac tamponade
a wave * Tricuspid stenosis
* Right ventricular hypertrophy
¢ Atrioventricular dissociation
v wave * Tricuspid regurgitation
Right ventricular pressure
Systolic * Pulmonic stenosis
* Pulmonary hypertension
Dastolic * Right ventricular failure
* Grrdiac tamponade
* Right ventricular hypertrophy
Pulmonary artery pressure
Systolic and diastolic * Pulmonary hypertension
* Left-sided heart failure
* Chronic lung disease
* Pulmonary vascular disease
Systolic only * Increased f ow (left-to-right shunt)
Pulmonary artery wedge pressure ° Left-sided heart failure
* Mtral stenosis or regurgitation
* Grrdiac tamponade
a wave ° Left ventricular hypertrophy
Vv wave * Mtral regurgitation
* Ventricular septal defect
EET
Pulmonary Artery Pressure
Elevation of systolic and diastolic pulmonary artery pressures occurs in three conditions: (1) left-
sided heart failure, (2) parenchymal lung disease (e.g., chronic bronchitis or end-stage emphy-
sema), and (3) pulmonary vascular disease (e.g., pulmonary embolism, primary pulmonary
hypertension, or acute respiratory distress syndrome). Normally, the pulmonary artery diastolic
pressure is equivalent to the left atrial pressure because of the low resistance of the pulmonary
vasculature that separates them. If the left atrial pressure rises because of left-sided heart failure,
both systolic and diastolic pulmonary artery pressures increase in an obligatory manner to main-
tain forward f ow through the lungs. This situation leads to “passive” pulmonary hypertension.
In certain conditions, however, pulmonary vascular resistance becomes abnormally high,
causing pulmonary artery diastolic pressure to be elevated compared with left atrial pressure.
For example, pulmonary vascular obstructive disease may develop as a complication ofa chronic
left-to-right cardiac shunt, such as an atrial or ventricular septal defect (see Chapter 16).
Pulmonary Artery Wedge Pressure
If a catheter is advanced into the right or left pulmonary artery, its tip will ultimately reach one
of the small pulmonary artery branches and temporarily occlude forward blood f ow beyond it.
During that time, a column of stagnant blood stands between the catheter tip and the portions
of the pulmonary capillary and pulmonary venous segments distal to it (Fig. 3-14). That column
of blood acts as an extension of the catheter, and the pressure recorded through the catheter
ref ects that of the downstream chamber—namely, the left atrium. Such a pressure measure-
ment is termed the pulmonary artery wedge pressure or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
Cardiac Imaging and Gatheterization 59
: Wa, CAS, VA ws —
AS aS
\Y \4 > LA
a FK DK OK EN
Pulmonary | Ca= er a and hn
artery catheter \ C ol KES, y) A pulmonary
Mv, F v4 vein
SSS

Catheter tip == a This area represents

occludes branch Faw “column of blood” between

of pulmonary artery catheter tip and LA

Pulmonary
capillaries

HGURE3-14. Diagram of a pulmonary artery catheter inserted into a branch of the pulmonary artery
(PA). How is occluded in the arterial, arteriolar, and capillary vessels beyond the catheter; thus, these vessels
act as a conduit that transmits the left atrial (LA) pressure to the catheter tip.
(PCW) and closely matches the left atrial pressure in most individuals. Furthermore, while the
mitral valve is open during diastole, the pulmonary venous bed, left atrium, and left ventricle
normally share the same pressures. Thus, the PCW can be used to estimate the left ventricular
diastolic pressure, a measurement of ventricular preload (see Chapter 9). As a result, measure-
ment of PCW may be useful in managing certain critically ill patients in the intensive care unit.

Elevation of the mean PCW is seen in left-sided heart failure and in mitral stenosis or regur-
gitation. The individual components of the PCW tracing can also become abnormally high.
The a wave may be increased in conditions of decreased left ventricular compliance, such as
left ventricular hypertrophy or acute myocardial ischemia, and in mitral stenosis. The v wave
is greater than normal when there is increased left atrial filling during ventricular contraction,
as in mitral regurgitation.

Measurement of Blood How
Cardiac output is measured by either the thermodilution method or the Fick technique. In the
thermodilution method, saline of a known temperature is injected rapidly through a catheter
side port into the right side of the heart, at a specific distance from the distal tip of the cath-
eter. The catheter tip, positioned in the pulmonary artery, contains a thermistor that registers
the change in temperature induced by the injected saline. The cardiac output is proportional
to the rate of the temperature change and is automatically calculated by the equipment.

The Fick method relies on the principle that the quantity of oxygen consumed by tissues
is related to the amount of O, content removed from blood as it fows through the tissue
capillary bed:

O, consumption = O, content removed x Flow
mLO, mLO, mL blood
min mL blood min
Or, in more applicable terms:
O,; consumption = AVO, difference <x Cardiac output
where the arteriovenous O, (AVO,) difference equals the difference in oxygen content between
the arterial and venous compartments. Total body oxygen consumption can be determined by
analyzing expired air from the lungs, and arterial and venous O, content is measured in blood
samples. By rearranging the terms, the cardiac output can be calculated:
; O, consumption
Cardiac output = ase
AVO, difference
60 Chapter 3
For example, if the arterial blood in a normal adult contains 190 mL of O, per liter and the
venous blood contains 150 mL of O, per liter, the arteriovenous difference is 40 mL of O, per
liter. If this patient has a measured O, consumption of 200 mL/min, the calculated cardiac
output is 5 L/min.

In many forms of heart disease, the cardiac output is lower than normal. In that situa-
tion, the total body oxygen consumption does not change significantly; however, a greater
percentage of O, is extracted per volume of circulating blood by the metabolizing tissues.
The result is a lower-than-normal venous O, content and therefore an increased AVO, dif-
ference. In our example, if the patient’s venous blood O, content fell to 100 mL/L, the AVO,
difference would increase to 90 mL/L and the calculated cardiac output would be reduced
to 2.2 L/min.

Because the normal range of cardiac output varies with a patient’s size, it is common to
report the cardiac index, which is equal to the cardiac output divided by the patient’s body
surface area (normal range of cardiac index = 2.6 — 4.2 L/min/m_’).

Qiiculation of Vascular Resistance
Once pressures and cardiac output have been determined, pulmonary and systemic vas-
cular resistances can be calculated, based on the principle that the pressure difference
across a vascular bed is proportional to the product of fow and resistance. The calcula-
tions are:
pvr = MPAP —LAP | 30
CO
PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance (dynes-sec-cm °)
MPAP, mean pulmonary artery pressure (mm Hg)
LAP, mean left atrial pressure (mm Hg)
CO, cardiac output (L/min)
SVR = MAP — RAP x 80
CO
SVR, systemic vascular resistance (dynes-sec-cm °*)
MAP, mean arterial pressure (mm Hg)
RAP, mean right atrial pressure (mm Hg)
CO, cardiac output (L/min)

The normal PVR ranges from 20 to 130 dynes-sec-cm’*. The normal SVR is 700 to 1,600

dynes-sec-cm °.

Contrast Angiography
This technique uses radiopaque contrast to visualize regions of the cardiovascular system.
A catheter is introduced into an appropriate vessel and guided under fuoroscopy to the site
of injection. Following administration of the contrast agent, x-rays are transmitted through
the area of interest. A continuous series of x-ray exposures is recorded to produce a motion
picture cineangiogram (often simply called a “cine” or “angiogram”).

Selective injection of contrast into specific heart chambers can be used to identify valvular
insufficiency, intracardiac shunts, thrombi within the heart, congenital malformations, and
to measure ventricular contractile function (Fig. 3-15). However, the noninvasive techniques
described in this chapter (e.g., echocardiography) have largely supplanted the need for inva-
sive contrast angiography for these purposes.
Cardiac Imaging and Catheterization 61
-
Fa *
4
r

A B
HGURE3-15. Left ventriculogram, in diastole (A) and systole (B) in the right anterior oblique projection,
from a patient with normal ventricular contractility. A catheter (black arrow) is used to inject contrast into
the left ventricle (LV). The catheter can also be seen in the descending aorta (white arrowhead). AQ aortic root.

An important and widespread application of contrast injection is coronary artery angiog-
raphy, to examine the location and severity of coronary atherosclerotic lesions. To maximize
the test’s sensitivity and reproducibility, each patient is imaged in several standard views.
When necessary, angioplasty and stent placement can be performed (Figs. 3-16 and 3-17;
see Chapter 6).

- LCX™

-
| iy a
, >
a ‘ Diagonal —_
LAD 7
LAD branch \
Septal
perforators
J

A B
HGURE3-16. Cardiac catheterization and stenting of a proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD)
stenosis, shown in an anteroposterior cranial projection. A. When contrast agent is injected into the left main
coronary artery (LM), the left circumf ex artery (LC¥) fills normally, but the LADis almost completely occluded at
its origin (white arrow). B After the stenosis is successfully stented, the LAD and its branches fill robustly.
62 chapter 3
| = ty --
S “ & — s -
lat

A B
HGURE3-17. Cardiac catheterization and stenting of right coronary artery (RCA) stenoses. Both
images are obtained in the left anterior oblique (LAO) projection. A. The stenotic segment is located between
the white arrows. B, After stenting, the caliber of the vessel and f ow have improved.

A small risk is associated with catheterization and contrast angiography. Complications are
uncommon but include myocardial perforation by the catheter, precipitation of arrhythmias
and conduction blocks, damage to vessel walls, hemorrhage, dislodgement of atherosclerotic
plaques, pericardial tamponade (see Chapter 14), and infection. The contrast medium itself
can cause anaphylaxis and renal toxicity.

Table 3-4 summarizes the catheterization findings in common cardiac abnormalities.
Therapeutic interventional catheterization techniques are described in Chapter 6.

Heart function can be evaluated using injected, radioactively labeled tracers and y-camera
detectors. The resulting images ref ect the distribution of the tracers within the cardiovascular
system. Nuclear techniques are used to assess myocardial perfusion, to image blood passing
through the heart and great vessels, to localize and quantify myocardial ischemia and infarc-
tion, and to assess myocardial metabolism.
TABLE 3-4
Disorder Finding
Qronary artery disease * Identification of atherosclerotic lesions
Mitral regurgitation * Large systolic v wave in left atrial pressure tracing
Mitral stenosis * Abnormally high pressure gradient between the left atrium and left
ventricle in diastole
Tricuspid insuff ciency * Large systolic v wave in the right atrial pressure tracing
Aortic stenosis * Systolic pressure gradient between the left ventricle and aorta
Heart failure * Reduced ejection fraction (see Chapter 9) if systolic dysfunction
* Hevated diastolic pressure with normal ejection fraction if diastolic
dysfunction
eee
Cardiac Imaging and Gtheterization 63

Assessment of Myocardial Perfusion
Ischemia and infarction resulting from CAD can be detected by myocardial perfusion imag-
ing using various radioisotopes, including compounds labeled with thallium-201 (*'Tl) and
technetium-99m (°'"Tc). Of the latter, currently, °'"Tc-sestamibi and *™Te-tetrofosmin are
used. Both 7" Tl- and ”™Tc-labeled compounds are sensitive for the detection of ischemic or
scarred myocardium, but each has distinct advantages. For example, the °™Tc-labeled agents
provide better image quality and are superior for detailed single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT, as in Fig. 3-18). Conversely, enhanced detection of myocardial cellular

viability is possible with *"'Tl imaging.

In the case of *'Tl imaging, the radioisotope is injected intravenously while the patient
exercises on a treadmill or stationary bicycle. Because thallium is a potassium analogue, it
enters normal myocytes, a process thought to be partially governed by sodium-—potassium
ATPase. The intracellular concentration of thallium, estimated by the density of the image,
depends on vascular supply (perfusion) and membrane function (tissue viability). In the
normal heart, the radionuclide scan shows a homogenous distribution of thallium in the

SHORT AXIS

r \
Sees _
- Pry
B
HORIZONTAL
| LONG AXIS
Nx
STRESS
“ [|
- 4.
Cc

HGURE3-18. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography
images (using °°"K-tetrofosmin) of a patient with a high-grade stenosis within the proximal
left anterior descending coronary artery. A. Miniaturized reproduction of the complete scan showing
tomographic images in each of the three views (from top to bottom: short axis, vertical long axis, and
horizontal long axis). The frst, third, and f {th rows demonstrate images during stress, and the second, fourth,
and sixth rows are matching images acquired at rest. B, C Enlarged selected panels from (A) showing stress
and rest images in the short-axis and horizontal long-axis views. The arrows indicate regions of decreased
perfusion during stress but normal perfusion on the matching resting scans, consistent with inducible
ischemia. Lat, lateral wall of the LV; Sep, septal wall. (Gourtesy of Marcelo Di Garli, MD, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, MA.)
64 chapter 3
myocardial tissue. Conversely, myocardial regions that are scarred (by previous infarction) or
have reduced perfusion during exercise (i.e., transient myocardial ischemia) do not accumu-
late as much thallium as normal heart muscle. Consequently, these areas will appear on the
thallium scan as light or “cold” spots.

When evaluating for myocardial ischemia, an initial set of images is taken right after exer-
cise and *"TI injection. Well-perfused myocardium will take up more tracer than ischemic or
infarcted myocardium at this time. Delayed images are acquired several hours later, because
°'T] accumulation does not remain fixed in myocytes. Rather, continuous redistribution of the
isotope occurs across the cell membrane. After 3 to 4 hours of redistribution, when additional
images are obtained, all viable myocytes will have equal concentrations of *"'Tl. Consequently,
any uptake abnormalities on the initial exercise scan that were caused by myocardial ischemia
will have resolved (i.e., filled in) on the delayed scan (and are therefore termed “reversible”
defects), and those representing infarcted or scarred myocardium will persist as cold spots
(“fixed” defects).

Of note, some myocardial segments that demonstrate persistent *"'Tl defects on both
stress and redistribution imaging are falsely characterized as nonviable, scarred tissue.
Sometimes, these areas represent ischemic, noncontractile, but metabolically, active areas
that have the potential to regain function if an adequate blood supply is restored. For
example, such areas may represent hibernating myocardium, segments that demonstrate
diminished contractile function owing to chronic reduction of coronary blood fow (see
Chapter 6). This viable state (in which the affected cells can be predicted to regain function
following coronary revascularization) can often be differentiated from irreversibly scarred
myocardium by repeat imaging at rest after the injection of additional *"Tl to enhance
uptake by viable cells.

*°™Tc-sestamibi (commonly referred to as MIBI) is an example of a widely used *™Tc-
labeled compound. This agent is a large lipophilic molecule that, like thalltum, is taken up in
the myocardium in proportion to blood f ow. The uptake mechanism differs in that the com-
pound crosses the myocyte membrane passively, driven by the negative membrane potential.
Once inside the cell, it further accumulates in mitochondria, driven by that organelle’s even
more negative membrane potential. The myocardial distribution of MIBI ref ects perfusion at
the moment of injection, and in contrast to thallium, it remains fixed intracellularly, that is,
it redistributes only minimally over time. Consequently, performing a MIBI procedure is more
f exible, as images can be obtained up to 4 to 6 hours after injection and repeated as neces-
sary. A MIBI study is usually performed as a 1-day protocol in which an initial injection of a
small tracer dose and imaging are performed at rest. Later, a larger tracer dose is given after
exercise, and imaging is repeated.

Stress nuclear imaging studies with either *"Tl- or *™Tc-labeled compounds have
greater sensitivity and specificity than standard exercise electrocardiography for the detec-
tion of ischemia but are more expensive and should be ordered judiciously. Nuclear imag-
ing is particularly appropriate for patients with certain baseline electrocardiogram (ECG)
abnormalities of the ST segment that preclude accurate interpretation of a standard exer-
cise test. Examples include patients with electronic pacemaker rhythms, those with left
bundle branch block, those with ST abnormalities due to left ventricular hypertrophy, and
those who take certain medications that alter the ST segment, such as digoxin. Nuclear
scans also provide more accurate anatomic localization of the ischemic segment(s) and
quantification of the extent of ischemia compared with standard exercise testing. In addi-
tion, electronic synchronizing (gating) of nuclear images to the ECG cycle permits wall
motion analysis.

Patients with orthopedic or neurologic conditions, as well as those with severe physical
deconditioning or chronic lung disease, may be unable to perform an adequate exercise test
on a treadmill or bicycle. In such patients, stress images can be obtained instead by adminis-
tering pharmacologic agents, such as adenosine or dipyridamole. These agents induce diffuse
Cardiac Imaging and Catheterization 65
coronary vasodilation, augmenting blood fow to myocardium perfused by healthy coronary
arteries. Since ischemic regions are already maximally dilated (because of local metabolite
accumulation), the drug-induced vasodilation causes a “steal” phenomenon, reducing isotope
uptake in regions distal to significant coronary stenoses (see Chapter 6). Alternatively, dobu-
tamine (see Chapter 17) can be infused intravenously to increase myocardial oxygen demand
as a means to assess for ischemia.

Radionuclide Ventriculography

Radionuclide ventriculography (RVG, also known as blood pool imaging) is occasionally used
to analyze right and left ventricular function. A radioisotope (usually °™Tc) is bound to red
blood cells or to human serum albumin and then injected as a bolus. Nuclear images are
obtained at fixed time intervals as the labeled material passes through the heart and great
vessels. Multiple images are displayed sequentially to produce a dynamic picture of blood
fow. Calculations, such as determination of the ejection fraction, are based on the difference
between radioactive counts present in the ventricle at the end of diastole and at the end of
systole. Therefore, measurements are largely independent of any assumptions of ventricular
geometry and are highly reproducible. Studies suggest that RVG and echocardiography pro-
vide similar left ventricular ejection fraction values.

RVG has been used historically to assess baseline cardiac function in patients scheduled to
undergo potentially cardiotoxic chemotherapy (e.g., doxorubicin) and to follow cardiac func-
tion over time in such patients. However, echocardiography is usually easier to perform, does
not expose the patient to ionizing radiation, and now commonly serves this role.

Assessment of Myocardial Metabolism
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a specialized nuclear imaging technique used to assess
myocardial perfusion and viability. PET imaging employs positron-emitting isotopes (e.g.,
rubidium-82, nitrogen-13, and fuorine-18) attached to metabolic or fow tracers. Sensitive
detectors measure positron emission from the tracer molecules.

Myocardial perfusion is commonly assessed using nitrogen-13—labeled ammonia or rubid-
ium-82. Both are taken up by myocytes in proportion to blood fow. Myocardial viability
can be determined by PET by studying glucose utilization in myocardial tissue. In normal
myocardium under fasting conditions, glucose is used for approximately 20% of energy pro-
duction, with free fatty acids providing the remaining 80%. In ischemic conditions, however,
metabolism shifts toward glucose use, and the more ischemic the myocardial tissue, the
stronger the reliance on glucose. Fluoro-18 deoxyglucose ('SFDG), created by substituting
fuorine-18 for hydrogen in 2-deoxyglucose, is used to study glucose uptake. This substance
competes with glucose both for transport into myocytes and for subsequent phosphoryla-
tion. Unlike glucose, however, '*FDG is not metabolized and becomes trapped within the
myocyte.

Combined evaluation of perfusion and '*FDG metabolism allows assessment of both
regional blood fow and glucose uptake, respectively. PET scanning thus helps determine
whether areas of ventricular contractile dysfunction with decreased f ow represent irrevers-
ibly damaged scar tissue or whether the region is still viable (e.g., hibernating myocardium).
In scar tissue, both blood f ow to the affected area and '*FDG uptake are decreased. Because
the myocytes in this region are permanently damaged, such tissue is not likely to benefit
from revascularization. Hibernating myocardium, in contrast, shows decreased blood fow
but normal or elevated '*FDG uptake. Such tissue may benefit from revascularization proce-
dures (see Chapter 6).

Table 3-5 summarizes the radionuclide imaging abnormalities associated with common
cardiac conditions.
66 Chapter 3
Disorder Findings
Myocardial ischemia
Stress-delayed reinjection 7°'Tl * Low uptake during stress with complete or partial fill-in with
delayed or reinjection images
Rest—stress ™Tc-labeled compounds * Normal uptake at rest with decreased uptake during stress
PET (N-13 ammonia/ 'SFDG) * Decreased f ow with normal or increased '*FDGuptake during stress
Myocardial infarction
Stress-delayed reinjection *°'Tl * Low uptake during stress and low uptake after reinjection
Rest—stress ™Tc-labeled compounds * Low uptake in rest and stress images
PET (N-13 ammonia/ 'SFDG) * Decreased f ow and decreased '*FDGuptake at rest
Hibemating myocardium
Rest-delayed *"'Tl * @moplete or partial fill-in of defects after reinjection
PET (N-13 ammonia/ '8FDG) * Decreased f ow and normal or increased '*FDGuptake at rest
a
'SEDG fuoro-18 deoxyglucose; N-13, nitrogen-13; PET positron emission tomography; Te, technetium-99m; 7"'Tl, thallium-201.
COVPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT uses thin x-ray beams to obtain a large series of axial plane images. An x-ray tube is pro-
grammed to rotate around the body, and the generated beams are partially absorbed by body
tissues. The remaining beams emerge and are captured by electronic detectors, which relay
information to a computer for image composition. CT scanning typically requires administra-
tion of an intravenous contrast agent to distinguish intravascular contents (i.e., blood) from
neighboring soft tissue structures (e.g., myocardium).

Applications of CT in cardiac imaging include assessment of the great vessels, peri-
cardium, myocardium, and coronary arteries. CT is used to diagnose aortic dissections
and aneurysms (Fig. 3-19). It can identify abnormal pericardial fuid, thickening, and
calcification. Myocardial abnormalities, such as regional hypertrophy or ventricular aneu-
rysms, and intracardiac thrombus formation can be distinctly visualized by CT. A limitation
of conventional CT techniques is the artifact generated by patient motion (i.e., breathing)
during image acquisition. Modern spiral CT (also called helical CT) imaging allows more
rapid image acquisition, often during a single breath-hold, at relatively lower radiation
doses than conventional CT. Spiral CT is particularly important in the diagnosis of pulmo-
nary embolism. When an intravenous iodine-based contrast agent is administered, emboli
create the appearance of “filling defects” in otherwise contrast-enhanced pulmonary vessels
(Fig. 3-20).

Electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) uses a direct electron beam to acquire
images in a matter of milliseconds. Rapid succession of images depicts cardiac structures at
multiple times during a single cardiac cycle. Displaying these images in a cine format can
provide estimates of left ventricular volumes and ejection fraction. Capable of detecting coro-
nary artery calcification, EBCT has been used primarily to screen for CAD. Because calcified
coronary artery plaques have a radiodensity similar to that of bone, they appear attenuated
(white) on CT. The Agatston score, a measure of total coronary artery calcium, correlates well
with atherosclerotic plaque burden and predicts the risk of coronary events, independently of
other cardiac risk factors.

Newer CT technology can characterize atherosclerotic stenoses in great detail. Current
multidetector row CT scanners acquire as many as 320 anatomic sections with each rota-
tion, providing excellent spatial resolution. Administration of intravenous contrast and
computer reformatting allows visualization of the arterial lumen and regions of coronary
¥ i .
4 ~ } ‘ z
ae»: —_ i ie ~~ 4 5
Oz “ae : ay
@ Rcl LCl <i!
, \ % LCl My Ms :
j LEI Ne .
B Cc D
HGURE3-19. G@mputed tomography (CI) imaging of aortic dissection. A,B Axial images demonstrate an
intimal f ap (blue arrowheads) separating the true and false lumens of the descending thoracic and abdominal
aorta. C CI angiography (CIA) with three-dimensional reconstructions. In this left anterior oblique view, the
origin of the dissection (blue arrowhead) is apparent in the distal portion of the aortic arch. The dissection
continues to the level of the renal arteries (white arrowhead) and beyond. D. In this CIA left posterior oblique
view, the dissection extends to the infrarenal aorta (white arrowhead) and involves the left common and
external iliac arteries (blue arrowhead). AA, ascending aorta; LO, left common iliac artery; LEI, left external
iliac artery; Lx, left kidney; PA, main pulmonary artery; RC, right common iliac artery; RK, right kidney.
(Qourtesy of Suhny Abbara, MD, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA)
rw | Te | a
c -_, f See a>
FIGURE 3-20. Spiral (helical) Ne 2 ae
computed tomography image J SVC Deel |
demonstrating a massive ve Se Pp
pulmonary embolism. The white , c re Cra & LPA
arrows point to a large thrombus 1. ae - ga |
within the right pulmonary artery. & o: // >) ail ~*~ |
It appears as a filling defect within [& Fa » * DA ~~ :
the otherwise contrast-enhanced > |
pulmonary vasculature. AA, i / =: aa
ascending aorta; DA, descending : r “ dj }
aorta; LPA, left pulmonary artery; ae ' ei, zt y A
PA, main pulmonary artery; RPA, aa > : »> (SS
right pulmonary artery; SVE NS = ge" EE te oes — <
superior vena cava. Bee “SS “ Lm _- :
68 chapter 3
. . —' Cn Ne > . a ‘ < ; a
~7 = a Vi i
v4 - a eh , 2) NP ASS ? Ms
Rc, a Sey [Te ay A ea
RSS. S tap oe ~~ Ate
oo ~~), Ye Sze : ey = 6 £ J
se. ys J . Fz. TV ; »
et HEE
i ‘es » fe r.4 ps nd
A B Cc
HGURE 3-21. G@mputed tomography (CI) coronary angiography. After a patient is imaged in a high-
resolution axial CT scanner, three-dimensional reconstructions (termed volume renderings) are generated
by a computer. A. Volume rendering of a normal CT angiogram. B Volume rendering of a CT angiogram that
demonstrates diffuse coronary artery disease. Notice that the caliber of each vessel is irregular along its
length. C This curved reformat of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) depicts the entire course of the
vessel in a single, fat image, making it easier to detect stenoses. None are present here. Ao, aorta; LA, left
atrium; LCX left circumf ex artery; LM left main coronary artery; LV left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA,
right atrium; RCA, right coronary artery; RV right ventricle. (Gourtesy of Suhny Abbara, MD, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA.)
narrowings (Fig. 3-21). Because image acquisition is timed with the cardiac cycle, a relatively
low heart rate is desirable, such that a B-blocker is often administered prior to scanning.

CT is not as sensitive as conventional angiography for the detection of coronary lesions,

and it cannot adequately evaluate stenosis within coronary artery stents. In addition, this
technique results in significant radiation exposure. However, CT is rapid, relatively inex-
pensive, and significantly less invasive than conventional angiography. Its role in assessing
patients with symptoms suggestive of CAD and for following the progression of known coro-
nary disease is under active evaluation.
MRI uses a powerful magnetic field to obtain detailed images of internal structures. This
technique is based on the magnetic polarity of hydrogen nuclei, which align themselves
with an applied magnetic field. Radio frequency excitation causes the nuclei to move out of
alignment momentarily. As they return to their resting states, the nuclei emit the absorbed
energy into signals that are translated into computer-generated images. Therefore, unlike CT
imaging, MRI requires no ionized radiation. Among all the imaging modalities, MRI is best at
differentiating tissue contrasts (blood, fuid, fat, and myocardium) and can often do so even
without the use of contrast agents. The addition of gadolinium-based contrast allows further
characterization of cardiac structures and tissues.

The detail of soft tissue structures is often exquisitely demonstrated in magnetic reso-
nance images (Fig. 3-22). Cardiac MRI (CMR) has an established role in evaluating congenital
anomalies, such as shunts, and diseases of the aorta, including aneurysm and dissection. It
is also used to assess left and right ventricular mass and volume, intravascular thrombus,
Cardiac Imaging and Gatheterization 69
DIASTOLE SYSTOLE .
AV
a Ae
S
cowl ir ~
| \ .
ewe OA
. MV
A
’ -
P <9 PM
B

HIGURE3-22. Cardiac magnetic resonance images of a normal person. A. Three-chamber long-axis view
of the heart in diastole and systole showing the left ventricle (LV), right ventricle (RV), and left atrium (LA).
The mitral valve (MV), aortic valve (AV), ascending aorta (AAO), and descending aorta (DA) are also imaged.
B. Mdventricular short-axis view demonstrating the LV RV and left ventricular papillary muscles (PMs). PW
posterior wall; S, septum. (Courtesy of Raymond Y Kwong, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
cardiomyopathies, and neoplastic disease (Fig. 3-23). ECG-gated and cine MRI techniques
capture images at discrete times in the cardiac cycle, allowing for the evaluation of valvular
and ventricular function.

Two applications of CMR deserve special mention. Coronary magnetic resonance angi-
ography (coronary MRA) is a noninvasive, contrast-free angiographic imaging modality.
Laminar blood fow appears as bright signal intensity, whereas turbulent blood f ow, at the
site of stenosis, results in less bright or absent signal intensity. This technique has shown high
sensitivity and accuracy for the detection of important CAD in the left main coronary artery
and in the proximal and midportions of the three major coronary vessels. Coronary MRA is
also useful in delineating coronary artery congenital anomalies.

In contrast-enhanced MRI, a gadolinium-based agent is administered intravenously to
identify infarcted (irreversibly damaged) myocardium and to differentiate it from impaired
(but viable) muscle segments. This technique is based on the fact that gadolinium is excluded
from viable cells with intact cell membranes but can permeate and concentrate in infarcted
zones, producing “hyperenhancement” on the image (Fig. 3-24). Owing to the high spatial
resolution of this technique, the transmural extent of myocardial scar can be depicted, and the
pattern of infarcting tissue can be differentiated from that of acute myocarditis, a condition
that may present with similar clinical features. The use of late-enhancing gadolinium imaging
also allows for the identification of poorly contractile “hibernating” myocardium (described
in Chapter 6), tissue that is chronically ischemic, but would be expected to recover function
if adequate blood perfusion is restored.
70 chapter 3
- , , 7 . | : Ps a :
> -=
’ —_ > os
# a |
¥
a
A
LV LV a :
RV RV
RA
LA IAN
‘
. .
is 4
A B
HIGURE3-23. Magnetic resonance imaging of an intracardiac mass. Both images are apical four-chamber
views. A. Before a gadolinium-based contrast agent is administered, an abnormal left atrial mass (indicated
by the oval) demonstrates diminished signal relative to the surrounding tissue. In this respect, it resembles
a nonvascular thrombus. B After contrast injection, the mass enhances similar to the surrounding tissue,
indicating that it is vascularized. Biopsy revealed a spindle cell carcinoma. LA, left atrium; LV left ventricle;
RA, right atrium; RV right ventricle. (Gourtesy of Raymond Y Kwong, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, MA.)
ra : TL t “.
nf mre ie
. —~< Va
= ae ¢ . v A
i oy “Aer
A B
HGURE3-24. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance images demonstrating a region of nonviable
myocardium. Both images are short-axis views. A. Imaging before administration of gadolinium demonstrates
thinning of the anterior and anteroseptal myocardium (blue arrow) suggestive of infarcted tissue (compare
to short-axis view of healthy myocardial wall in Fig. 3.22-B). B After contrast injection, the subendocardial
regions of the anterior and anteroseptal segments of the left ventricle selectively enhance (white arrows),
indicating that scar tissue is present. Because more than half the thickness of the ventricular wall is scarred,
coronary revascularization would have a low likelihood of improving contractile function of these myocardial
segments. LV left ventricle; RV right ventricle. (Gourtesy of Raymond Y Kwong, MD, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, MA.)
Cardiac Imaging and Catheterization 71

This chapter has presented an overview of imaging and catheterization techniques avail-
able to assess cardiac structure and function. Many of these tools are expensive and yield
similar information. For example, estimates of ventricular contractile function can be made
by echocardiography, nuclear imaging, contrast angiography, gated CT, or MRI. Myocardial
viability can be assessed using nuclear imaging studies, gadolinium MRI, or dobutamine
echocardiography.

Determining the single best test for any given patient depends on a number of fac-
tors. One is the ease by which images may be obtained. In a critically ill patient, bed-
side echocardiography provides a readily acquired measure of left ventricular systolic
function. Conversely, obtaining similar information from a nuclear or magnetic reso-
nance study would require a trip to the respective scanner. Other factors to consider
include the magnitude of radiation exposure and the invasiveness of a given imaging
technique. Expense, available equipment, and institutional expertise also play roles in
selecting an imaging approach. When used appropriately, each of these tools can pro-
vide important information to guide the diagnosis and management of cardiovascular
disorders.

° Imaging and catheterization techniques provide important information to guide the diag-
nosis and management of cardiovascular disorders; key uses are summarized here and in
Table 3-6.

° Chest radiography can detect chamber dilatation and visualize pulmonary signs of heart
failure.

° Transthoracic echocardiography can assess ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunc-
tion, identify valvular abnormalities and vegetations, diagnose consequences of myo-
cardial infarction, and demonstrate pericardial and congenital abnormalities.

° Transesophageal echocardiography is used to visualize intracardiac thrombus, evaluate pros-
thetic valve dysfunction, identify valvular vegetations and myocardial abscess in endocardi-
tis, and diagnose aortic dissection.

° Diagnostic cardiac catheterization is the “gold standard” to assess intracardiac pressures and
to identify and grade coronary artery stenoses.

° Nuclear imaging can diagnose myocardial ischemia and distinguish viable myocardium from
scar tissue.

° Positron emission tomography is used to assess for ischemia and can distinguish viable myo-
cardium from scar tissue.

° Computed tomography is sensitive for the diagnosis of aortic dissection and pulmonary
embolism, can assess pericardial conditions and detect coronary artery calcif cation and
stenoses.

° Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates great detail of soft tissue structures and is used
to def ne the specif c conditions listed in Table 3-6.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Marcelo Di Carli, MD; Raymond Y. Kwong, MD; and Gillian

Lieberman, MD for their helpful suggestions. Contributors to previous editions of this chapter

were Henry Jung, MD; Ken Young Lin, MD; Nicole Martin, MD; Deborah Bucino, MD; Sharon

Horesh, MD; Shona Pendse, MD; Albert S. Tu, MD; and Patrick Yachimski, MD.
72 Chapter 3
Imaging Technique Findings Examples of Cinical Uses
chest radiography * Gardiac and mediastinal * Detect chamber dilatation
contours * Identify consequences of stenotic and regurgi-
* Pulmonary vascular tant valve lesions and intracardiac shunts
markings * Msualize pulmonary signs of heart failure
Transthoracic ° Wall thickness, chamber * Assess global and segmental ventricular
echocardiography dimensions contraction
(TIE) ° Anatomic relationships * Identify valvular abnormalities and vegetations
and motion of cardiac * Diagnose consequences of myocardial
structures infarction (e.g., ventricular aneurysm, papil-

* How direction, tur- lary muscle rupture, intraventricular thrombus)
bulence, and velocity ° Identify myocardial, pericardial, and congeni-
measurements tal abnormalities

* Echo contrast studies

* Stress echocardiography

Transesophageal ° Similar to TIE but higher * Visualize intracardiac thrombus
echocardiography resolution ° Evaluate prosthetic valves and perivalvular
(TEE) leaks

* Identify valvular vegetations and myocardial
abscess in endocarditis
* Diagnose aortic dissection

Cardiac * Pressure measurement ° Evaluate intracardiac pressures (e.g., in valvu-
catheterization * @ntrast angiography lar disease, heart failure, pericardial disease)

e Msualize ventricular contractile function,
regurgitant valve lesions

* Identify coronary anatomy and severity of
stenoses

Noclear SPECT imag- * Regional myocardial ° Detect, quantify, and localize myocardial
ing (using ”™Te- perfusion ischemia
labeled compounds * Myocardial viability * Perform stress testing in patients with baseline
or 7°' Tl) EGG abnormalities

* Distinguish viable myocardium from scar tissue

Radionuclide * Ventricular contractile * Glculate ventricular ejection fraction and
ventriculography function quantitate intracardiac shunts

Positron emission * Myocardial perfusion and * Evaluate contractile function
tomography (PEI) metabolism * Distinguish viable myocardium from scar tissue

@mputed tomogra- * Anatomy and structural * Diagnose disease of the great vessels (aortic
phy (CT) relationships dissection, pulmonary embolism)

Assess pericardial disease and myocardial
abnormalities

* Detect coronary artery calcif cation and
stenoses

Magnetic resonance © Detailed soft tissue * Assess myocardial structure and function (e.g.,
imaging (MRI) anatomy ventricular mass and volume, neoplastic dis-

ease, intracardiac thrombus, cardiomyopathies)
* Diagnose aortic and pericardial disease
* Detect areas of ischemic vs. infarcted
myocardium
eee
EG electrocardiogram; SPECE single photon emission computed tomography; "Tc, technetium-99m; *"'Tl, thallium-201.
Cardiac Imaging and Gtheterization 73

Additional Reading

Bengel FM, Higuchi T, Javadi MS, et al. Cardiac positron Maganti K, Rigolin VH, Sarano EM, et al. Valvular heart
emission tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1-15. disease: diagnosis and management. Mayo Clin Proc.

Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines DE, et al. ACCF/ ASE/ 2010;85:483—500.

AHA/ ASNC/ HFSA/ HRS/ SCAI/ SCCM/ SCCT/ SCMR 2011 Min JK, Shaw LJ, Berman DS. The present state of coronary
appropriate use criteria for echocardiography. J Am Coll computed tomographic angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol.
Cardiol. 2011;57:1126—-1166. 2010;55:957—965.

Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/ AHA/ ACP/ Moscucci M, Grossman W. Grossman’s Cardiac Catheterization,
AATS/ PCNA/ SCAI/ STS Guideline for the diagnosis and Angiography and Intervention. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.

J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:e44—-e164. Otto CM. Textbook of Clinical Echocardiography. 5th ed.

Kern MJ, Samady H. Current concepts of integrated coronary Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013.
physiology in the catheterization laboratory. J Am Coll Pennell DJ. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance. Circulation.
Cardiol. 2010;55:173-185. 2010; 121:692—705.

Kim HW, Farzaneh-Far A, Kim RJ. Cardiovascular magnetic Perrino AC, Reeves ST. A Practical Approach to
resonance in patients with myocardial infarction: current Transesophageal Echocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA:
and emerging applications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1-16. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.
- : i
mi 4
;
The Hectrocardiogram
David B. Fischer a
Leonard S. Lilly f
4 ,
ow
Chapter Outline C ardiac contraction relies on the organized f ow of elec-
trical impulses through the heart. The electrocardiogram
NLL LIELISE (EG) is an easily obtained recording of that activity and pro-
e :
Hectrocardiographic Lead vides a wealth of information about cardiac structure and func-
Reference System tion. This chapter presents the electrical basis of the BGG in
Sequence of Normal Cardiac health and disease and leads the reader through the basics of
Activation interpretation. To practice using these principles and to become
TAVETPICUaUOn or the skillful at interpreting HCGtracings of your patients, you should
a an also consult one of the complete electrocardiographic manuals
ibration . ;
Hoov=Risohns listed at the end of this chapter.
Heart Rate
Intervals (P. ,
ee ELECIRICAL MEASUREVENF—SINGLE-
ee CELL MODEL
This section begins by observing the propagation of an
Complex electrical impulse along a single cardiac muscle cell, illus-
SF Segment and ‘Pwave trated in Figure 4-1. On the right side of the diagram, a
Abnormalities voltmeter records the electrical potential at the cell’s sur-
face on graph paper. In the resting state, the cell is polar-
ized; that is, the entire outside of the cell is electrically
positive with respect to the inside, because of the ionic
distribution across the cell membrane, as described in
Chapter 1. In this resting state, the voltmeter electrodes,
which are placed on opposite outside surfaces of the cell,
do not record any electrical activity, because there is no
electrical potential difference between them (the myocyte
74
