7 e
e
The Cardiac Cycle
Mechanisms of Heart
Sounds and Murmurs
David B. Fischer
Leonard S. Lilly
Chapter Outline C ardiac diseases often cause abnormal findings on physi-
a cal examination, including pathologic heart sounds and
Cardiac Cycle 4: . ‘
Heart Sounds murmurs. These findings are clues to the underlying pathophysi-
First Hsart-Sound(S) ology, and proper interpretation is essential for successful diag-
Second Heart Sound (S,) nosis and disease management. This chapter first describes heart
Extra Systolic Heart Sounds sounds in the context of normal cardiac physiology and then
Extra Diastolic Heart Sounds focuses on the origins of pathologic heart sounds and murmurs.
Marmurs Many cardiac diseases are mentioned brief y in this chapter as
ae “as examples of abnormal heart sounds and murmurs. Fach of these
a — conditions is described in greater detail later in the book, so it
is not necessary or desirable to memorize all of the examples
presented here. Rather, the goal of this chapter is to explain the
mechanisms by which the abnormal sounds are produced, so that
their descriptions will make sense in later chapters.
OO CARDIACOE
The cardiac cycle consists of precisely timed electrical and
mechanical events that are responsible for rhythmic atrial and
ventricular contractions. Figure 2-1 displays the pressure rela-
tionships between the left-sided cardiac chambers during the
normal cardiac cycle and serves as a platform for describing
key events. Mechanical systole refers to the phase of ventricu-
lar contraction, and diastole refers to the phase of ventricular
relaxation and f lling. Throughout the cardiac cycle, the right
and left atria accept blood returning to the heart from the
systemic veins and from the pulmonary veins, respectively.
During diastole, blood passes from the atria into the ventricles
across the open tricuspid and mitral valves, causing a gradual
increase in ventricular diastolic pressures. In late diastole,
atrial contraction propels a f nal bolus of blood into each ven-
tricle, an action that produces a brief further rise in atrial and
ventricle pressures, termed the a wave (see Fig. 2-1).
The Cardiac Gycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 27
ECG \ Contraction of the ventricles follows, signaling the
onset of mechanical systole. As the ventricles start to
AV closes contract, the pressures within them rapidly exceed
AV opens J atrial pressures. This results in the forced closure of
100 Ww the tricuspid and mitral valves, which produces the
Aorta first heart sound, termed S,. This sound has two nearly
superimposed components: the mitral component
slightly precedes that of the tricuspid valve because of
Lv the earlier electrical activation of the left ventricle (as
50 described in Chapter 4).
As the right and left ventricular pressures rapidly
MV closes MV opens rise further, they soon exceed the diastolic pressures
\ / within the pulmonary artery and aorta, forcing the
LA ; y pulmonic and aortic valves to open, and blood is
a | ejected into the pulmonary and systemic circulations.
| Time | The ventricular pressures continue to increase during
the initial portion of this ejection phase, and then
| decline as ventricular relaxation commences. Since
the pulmonic and aortic valves are open during this
51 52 phase, the aortic and pulmonary artery pressures
rise and fall in parallel to those of the corresponding
FIGURE2-1. The normal cardiac cycle, showing ventricles.
pressure relationships between the left-sided heart At the conclusion of ventricular ejection, the ven-
chambers. During diastole, the mitral valve (MV) is tricular pressures decline below those of the pulmo-
open, so that the left atrial (LA) and left ventricular nary artery and aorta (the pulmonary artery and aorta
(LY) pressures are equal. In late diastole, LA are elastic structures that dissipate pressure more
contraction causes a small nse an Pressure 1 both the gradually than do the ventricles), such that the pul-
LA and LV(the a wave). During systolic contraction, ; ;
the LV pressure rises; when it exceeds the [A pressure, ™onic and aortic valves are forced to close, produc-
the MV closes, contributing to the first heart sound ing the second heart sound, S,. Like the first heart
(S,). As LV pressure rises above the aortic pressure, sound (S,), this sound consists of two parts: the aortic
the aortic valve (AV) opens, which is a silent event. (A,) component normally precedes the pulmonic (P;)
As the ventricle begins to relax and its pressure falls because the diastolic pressure gradient between the
below that of the aorta, the AVcloses, contributing aorta and left ventricle is greater than that between
to the second heart sound (S,). As LVpressure falls . . .
further, below that of the LA, the MVopens, which is the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle, forcing
silent in the normal heart. In addition to the a wave, the aortic valve to shut more readily. The ventricular
the LA pressure curve displays two other positive pressures fall rapidly during the subsequent relaxation
def ections: the c wave represents a small rise in LA phase. As they drop below the pressures in the right
pressure as the MV closes and bulges into the atrium, = and left atria, the tricuspid and mitral valves open,
and the v wave is the result of passive filling of the followed by diastolic ventricular filling and then rep-
LA from the pulmonary veins during systole, when the tition of this cycle.
MV's closed. Notice in Figure 2-1 that in addition to the a wave,
the atrial pressure curve (in red color) displays two
other positive defections during the cardiac cycle: the c wave represents a small rise in atrial
pressure as the tricuspid and mitral valves close and bulge into their respective atria. The
v wave is the result of passive filling of the atria from the systemic and pulmonary veins dur-
ing systole, a period during which blood accumulates in the atria because the tricuspid and
mitral valves are closed.
At the bedside, systole can be approximated as the period from S, to S,, and diastole from S,
to the next S,. Although the duration of systole remains constant from beat to beat, the length
of diastole varies with the heart rate: the faster the heart rate, the shorter the diastolic phase.
28 chapter 2
The main sounds, S, and S,, provide a framework from which all other heart sounds and
murmurs can be timed.

The pressure relationships and events depicted in Figure 2-1 are those that occur in the left
side of the heart. Equivalent events occur simultaneously in the right side of the heart in the
right atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary artery. At the bedside, clues to right heart func-
tion can be ascertained by examining the jugular venous pulse, which is representative of the
right atrial pressure (see Box 2-1).
ee

BOX2-1 Jugular Venous Pulsations and Assessment of Right Heart

Function

Bedside observation of jugular venous pulsations in the neck is a vital part of the cardiovascular

examination. Wth no structures impeding blood f ow between the internal jugular (IJ) veins and

the superior vena cava and right atrium 4

(RA), the height of the IJ venous column

(termed the “jugular venous pressure” or

JVP) is an accurate representation of the y

RA pressure. Thus, the J VP provides an .

easily obtainable measure of right heart x y

function.

Typical f uctuations in the jugular

venous pulse during the cardiac cycle, manifested by oscillations in the overlying skin, are shown

in the figure (notice the similarity to the atrial pressure tracing in Hg. 2-1). There are two major

upward components, the a and v waves, followed by two descents, termed x and y. The x descent,

which represents the pressure decline following the a wave, may be interrupted by a small upward
def ection (the c wave) at the time of tricuspid valve closure, but that is often not distinguishable

in the JVP. The a wave represents transient venous distension caused by back pressure from RA

contraction. The v wave corresponds to passive filling of the RA from the systemic veins during

systole, when the tricuspid valve is closed. Opening of the tricuspid valve in early diastole allows
blood to rapidly empty from the RA into the right ventricle; that fall in RA pressure corresponds to
the y descent.

Qnditions that abnormally raise right-sided cardiac pressures (e.g., heart failure, tricuspid

valve disease, pulmonic stenosis, pericardial diseases) elevate the JVP, while reduced intravascular

volume (e.g., dehydration) decreases it. In addition, specific disease states can inf uence the

individual components of the JVP, examples of which are listed here for reference and explained in
subsequent chapters:

Prominent a: right ventricular hypertrophy, tricuspid stenosis

Prominent v: tricuspid regurgitation

Prominent y: constrictive pericarditis

Technique of Measurement

The J VP is measured as the maximum vertical height of the internal jugular vein (in cm) above the

center of the right atrium, and in a normal person is <9 cm. Because the sternal angle is located

approximately 5 cm above the center of the RA, the JVP is calculated at the bedside by adding

5 cm to the vertical height of the top of the IJ venous column above the sternal angle.

The right-sided IJ vein is usually the easiest to evaluate because it extends directly upward

from the RA and superior vena cava. First, observe the pulsations in the skin overlying the IJ with

the patient supine and the head of the bed at about a 45-degree angle. Shining a light obliquely

across the neck helps to visualize the pulsations. Be sure to examine the IJ, not the external

jugular vein. The former is medial to, or behind, the sternocleidomastoid muscle, whereas the

external jugular is usually more lateral. Although the external jugular is typically easier to see,

it does not always accurately ref ect RA pressure because it contains valves that interfere with

venous return to the heart.
The Cardiac Gycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 29
ee
BOX2-1 Jugular Venous Pulsations and Assessment of Right Heart
Function (continued)

If the top of the IJ column is not visible at 45 degrees, the column of blood is either too
low (below the clavicle) or too high (above the jaw) to be measured in that position. In such
situations, the head of the bed must be lowered or raised, respectively, so that the top of the
column becomes visible. As long as the top can be ascertained, the vertical height of the JVP
above or below the sternal angle will accurately ref ect RA pressure, no matter the angle of the
head of the bed.

Sometimes it can be difficult to distinguish the jugular venous pulsations from the neighboring
carotid artery. Unlike the carotid, the JVP is usually not pulsatile to palpation, it has a double (or
triple) upstroke rather than a single one, and it declines in most patients by assuming the seated
position or during inspiration.

HEART SOUNDS
Commonly used stethoscopes contain two chest pieces for auscultation of the heart.
The concave “bell” chest piece, meant to be applied lightly to the skin, accentuates low-
frequency sounds. Conversely, the fat “diaphragm” chest piece is designed to be pressed
firmly against the skin to eliminate low frequencies and therefore accentuate high-frequency
sounds and murmurs. Some modern stethoscopes incorporate both the bell and diaphragm
functions into a single chest piece; in these models, placing the piece lightly on the skin
brings out the low-frequency sounds, while firm pressure accentuates the high-frequency
ones. The sections below describe when, and where on the chest, to listen for high- versus
low-frequency sounds.
Hirst Heart Sound (S,)
S, is produced by the closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves in early systole and is
loudest near the apex of the heart (Fig. 2-2). It is a high-frequency sound, best heard with
the diaphragm of the stethoscope. Although mitral closure usually precedes tricuspid clo-
sure, they are separated by only about 0.01 seconds, such that the human ear appreciates
only a single sound. An exception occurs in patients
Aortic area Pulmonic area = with right bundle branch block (see Chapter 4),
(2nd—3rd right (2nd—3rd left in whom these components may be audibly split
interspace) interspace) ; ; ;
YON because of delayed right ventricular contraction and
7 (e=S) late closure of the tricuspid valve.
Gages) Three factors determine the intensity of S,: (1) the

\Ss . cr) distance separating the leafets of the open valves at the

iS = onset of ventricular contraction, (2) the mobility of the

wey I) mitral and tricuspid leaf ets (normal, or rigid because of

Tricus pid area Ree AA Sy, stenosis), and (3) the rate of rise of ventricular pressure
(le ft lower rs VaaaN uw) (Table 2-1).

sternalborder) | \Y VN ty) apex) The distance between the open valve leaf ets at

| “ _ y | , the onset of ventricular contraction relates to the

= electrocardiographic PR interval (see Chapter 4), the

FIGURE 2-2. Standard positions of stethoscope period between the onset of atrial and ventricular

placement for cardiac auscultation. The mitral area activation. Atrial contraction at the end of diastole

localizes to the cardiac apex while the aortic and forces the tricuspid and mitral valve leaf ets apart.

pulmonic regions represent the cardiac base. They start to passively drift back together, but once
30 chapter 2

Accentuated S,

|. Shortened PR interval

2. Mild mitral stenosis

3. High cardiac output states or tachycardia (e.g., exercise)

Diminished S,

|. Lengthened PR interval: f rst-degree AV nodal block

2. Mitral regurgitation

3. Severe mitral stenosis

4. “Stiff” left ventricle (e.g., left ventricular hypertrophy due to systemic hypertension)
I
ventricular contraction causes the ventricular pressure to exceed that in the atrium, the
leaf ets are forced to close from whatever positions they occupy at that moment. An accen-
tuated S, results when the PR interval is shorter than normal, because the valve leaf ets
have less time to drift back together and are therefore forced shut from a relatively wide
distance.

Similarly, in mild mitral stenosis (see Chapter 8), impeded f ow through the mitral valve
causes a prolonged diastolic pressure gradient between the left atrium and ventricle, which
keeps the mobile portions of the mitral leaf ets farther apart than normal during late diastole.
Because the leafets are relatively wide apart at the onset of systole, they are forced shut
loudly when the left ventricle contracts.

S; may also be accentuated when the heart rate is more rapid than normal (i.e., tachycar-
dia) because diastole is shortened and the leaf ets have less time to drift back together before
the ventricles contract.

Conditions that reduce the intensity of S, are also listed in Table 2-1. In first-degree
atrioventricular (AV) block (see Chapter 12), a diminished S, results from an abnormally
prolonged PR interval, which delays the onset of ventricular contraction. Consequently,
following atrial contraction, the mitral and tricuspid valves have additional time to f oat
back together so that the leaf ets are forced closed from only a small distance apart and the
sound is softened.

In patients with mitral regurgitation (see Chapter 8), S, is often diminished in intensity
because the mitral leaf ets may not come into full contact with one another as they close. In
severe mitral stenosis, the leaf ets are nearly fixed in position throughout the cardiac cycle,
and that reduced movement lessens the intensity of S;.

In patients with a “stiffened” left ventricle (e.g., a hypertrophied chamber), atrial contrac-
tion generates a higher-than-normal ventricular pressure at the end of diastole. This greater
pressure causes the mitral leaf ets to drift together more rapidly, so that they are forced closed
from a smaller-than-normal distance when ventricular contraction begins, thus reducing the
intensity of S).

Second Heart Sound (S,)
The second heart sound results from the closure of the aortic and pulmonic valves and there-
fore has aortic (A,) and pulmonic (P;) components. Unlike S,, which is usually heard only as
a single sound, the components of S, vary with the respiratory cycle: they are normally fused
as one sound during expiration but become audibly separated during inspiration, a situation
termed normal or physiologic splitting (Fig. 2-3).

One explanation for normal splitting of S, is as follows. Expansion of the chest during
inspiration causes the intrathoracic pressure to become more negative. The negative pressure
The Cardiac Gycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 31
Expiration |
: : In expiration, A, and P
Physiologic (normal) S AP fa p 2 , 2
splitting 1 2° 2 se as one soun
Inspiration | | |
Common causes
Expiration | | |
. wg: Ss A. P * Right bundle branch block
Widened splitting 1 2? ¢ Pulmonary stenosis
Inspiration | | |
Expiration | | |
Fixed splitting S; A, P, * Atrial septal defect
Inspiration | | |
Expiration | | |
¢ Left bundle branch block
Paradoxical splitting S; PLA, ¢ Advanced aortic stenosis
(Note reversed position
of A, and P,)
Inspiration
H@GURE2-3. Splitting pattems of the second heart sound (S,). A,, aortic component; P,, pulmonic component
of S; S|, frst heart sound.
transiently increases the capacitance (and reduces the impedance) of the intrathoracic pul-
monary vessels. As a result, there is a temporary delay in the diastolic “back pressure” in the
pulmonary artery responsible for the closure of the pulmonic valve. Thus, P,; is delayed; that
is, it occurs later during inspiration than during expiration.
Inspiration has the opposite effect on aortic valve closure. Because the capacitance of the
intrathoracic pulmonary veins is increased by the negative pressure generated by inspiration,
32 chapter 2

the venous return to the left atrium and ventricle temporarily decreases. Reduced filling of the
LV diminishes the stroke volume during the next systolic contraction and therefore shortens
the time required for LV emptying. Therefore, aortic valve closure (A,) occurs slightly earlier
in inspiration than during expiration. The combination of an earlier A, and delayed P, during
inspiration causes audible separation of the two components. Since these components are
high-frequency sounds, they are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope, and split-
ting of S, is usually most easily appreciated near the second left intercostal space next to the
sternum (see the pulmonic area in Fig. 2-2).

Abnormalities of S, include alterations in its intensity and changes in the pattern of split-
ting. The intensity of S, depends on the velocity of blood coursing back toward the valves
from the aorta and pulmonary artery after the completion of ventricular contraction, and the
suddenness with which that motion is arrested by the closing valves. In systemic hyperten-
sion or pulmonary arterial hypertension, the diastolic pressure in the respective great artery is
higher than normal, such that the velocity of the blood surging toward the valve is augmented
and S, is accentuated. Conversely, in severe aortic or pulmonic valve stenosis, the valve com-
missures are nearly fixed in position, such that the contribution of the stenotic valve to S, is
diminished.

There are three types of abnormal splitting patterns of S,: widened, fixed, and paradoxical.
Widened splitting of S, refers to an increase in the time interval between A, and P,, such that
the two components are audibly separated even during expiration and become more widely
separated in inspiration (see Fig. 2-3). This pattern is usually the result of delayed closure of
the pulmonic valve, which occurs in right bundle branch block (described in Chapter 4) and
sometimes in pulmonic valve stenosis (see Chapter 16).

Fixed splitting of S, is an abnormally widened interval between A, and P, that persists
unchanged through the respiratory cycle (see Fig. 2-3). The most common abnormality
that causes fixed splitting of S, is an atrial septal defect (see Chapter 16). In that condi-
tion, chronic volume overload of the right-sided circulation results in a high-capacitance,
low-resistance pulmonary vascular system. This alteration in pulmonary artery hemody-
namics delays the back pressure responsible for the closure of the pulmonic valve. Thus,
P, occurs later than normal, even during expiration, such that there is wider-than-normal
separation of A, and P;. The pattern of splitting does not change (1.e., it is fixed) during
the respiratory cycle because (1) inspiration does not substantially increase further the
already elevated pulmonary vascular capacitance and (2) augmented filling of the right
atrium from the systemic veins during inspiration is counterbalanced by a reciprocal
decrease in the left-to-right transatrial shunt, eliminating respiratory variations in right
ventricular filling.

Paradoxical splitting (also termed “reversed” splitting) refers to audible separation of A,
and P, during expiration that fuses into a single sound on inspiration, the opposite of the
normal situation. It ref ects an abnormal delay in the closure of the aortic valve such that P,
precedes Aj. In adults, the most common cause is left bundle branch block (LBBB). In LBBB,
described in Chapter 4, the spread of electrical activity through the left ventricle is impaired,
resulting in delayed ventricular contraction and late closure of the aortic valve, causing A, to
abnormally follow P; with wide separation between them. Then, during inspiration, as in the
normal case, the pulmonic valve closure sound becomes delayed and the aortic valve closure
sound moves earlier. This results in narrowing, and often superimposition, of the two sounds;
thus, there is no apparent split at the height of inspiration (see Fig. 2-3). In addition to LBBB,
paradoxical splitting may be observed under circumstances in which left ventricular ejection
is greatly prolonged, such as aortic stenosis.

Extra Systolic Heart Sounds
Extra systolic heart sounds may occur in early-, mid-, or late systole.
The Cardiac Cycle: Mechanisms of Heart Sounds and Mirmurs 33
Farly Extra Systolic Heart Sounds EcG /\
Abnormal early systolic sounds, or ejection clicks,
occur shortly after S,; and coincide with the opening of
the aortic or pulmonic valves (Fig. 2-4). These sounds /*
have a sharp, high-pitched quality, so they are heard Aorta
best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope placed
over the aortic and pulmonic areas (see Fig. 2-2). LV
Ejection clicks indicate the presence of aortic or pul-
monic valve stenosis or dilatation of the pulmonary
artery or aorta. In stenosis of the aortic or pulmonic MV opens
valve, the sound occurs as the deformed valve leaf- J
lets reach their maximal level of ascent into the great LA
artery, just prior to blood ejection. At that moment, | |
the rapidly ascending valve reaches its elastic limit bio 1 |
and decelerates abruptly, an action thought to result | |
in the sound generation. In dilatation of the root of
the aorta or pulmonary artery, the sound is associated $451 Sa S;
. . . . Ejection OS
with sudden tensing of the aortic or pulmonic root rick
with the onset of blood f ow into the vessel. The aortic
ejection click is heard at both the base (represented by FIGURE2-4. Timing of extra
the aortic and pulmonary regions in Fig. 2-2) and the ewe and diastolic heart sounds.
; —— 4 1S produced by atrial contraction
apex of the heart and does not vary with respiration.  jnto a “stiff” left ventricle (LW). An
In contrast, the pulmonic ejection click is heard only at ejection click follows the opening of
the base, and its intensity diminishes during inspira- _ the aortic or pulmonic valve in cases
tion (see Chapter 16). of valve stenosis or dilatation of the
corresponding great artery. S; occurs
during the period of rapid ventricular
Mid- or Late Extra Systolic Heart Sounds f lling; it is normal in young people,
but its presence in adults implies LV
Clicks occurring in mid- or late systole are usually the contractile dysfunction. The timing
result of systolic prolapse of the mitral or tricuspid of an opening snap (OS) in a patient
valves, in which the leaf ets bulge abnormally from the with mitral stenosis is placed for
ventricular side of the AV junction into the atrium dur- comparison. It is not likely that more
ing ventricular contraction, often accompanied by val- than one or two of these extra sounds
vular regurgitation (described in Chapter 8). They are eh one WN natal valve.
loudest over the mitral or tricuspid auscultatory regions,
respectively.
Extra Diastolic Heart Sounds
Extra heart sounds in diastole include the opening snap (OS), the third heart sound (S;), the
fourth heart sound (S,), and the pericardial knock.
Opening Snap
Opening of the mitral and tricuspid valves is normally silent, but mitral or tricuspid valvular
stenosis (usually the result of rheumatic heart disease; see Chapter 8) produces a sound,
termed as snap, when the affected valve opens. It is a sharp, high-pitched sound, and its
timing does not vary significantly with respiration. In mitral stenosis (which is much more
common than is tricuspid valve stenosis), the OS is heard best between the apex and the left
sternal border, just after the aortic closure sound (A), when the left ventricular pressure falls
below that of the left atrium (see Fig. 2-4).
