”
1 F 4 } =z
1 i
Heart Failure é
'
David Miranda \ i,
Gregory D. Lewis
Michael A. Fifer
-
=
Chapter Outline T he heart normally accepts blood at low flling pressures
during diastole and then propels it forward at higher
Physiology . . .
pressures in systole. Heart failure is present when the heart

Determinants of Contractile . :

Function in the Intact Heart is unable to pump blood forward at a suff cient rate to meet

Pressure—Volume Loops the metabolic demands of the body or is able to do so only

Pathophysiology if cardiac flling pressures are abnormally high. Although

Heart Failure with Reduced EF conditions outside the heart may cause this def nition to be

Heart Farture with Preserved EF met through inadequate tissue perfusion (e.g., severe hemor-

Right-Sided Heart Failure . . .

. rhage) or increased metabolic demands (e.g., hyperthyroid-
@mpensatory Mechanisms . . . . .

Frnalevesiingsvsohenions ism), in this chapter, only cardiac causes of heart failure are

Neurohormonal Alterations considered.

Ventricular Hypertrophy and Heart failure results in a clinical syndrome of fatigue, short-

Remodeling ness of breath, and often volume overload. It may be the fnal
ee _ SHE sca se. TOTTI coronary EIS CET
Cinical Manifestations infarction, valvular diseases, hypertension, congenital heart

Symptoms disease, and the cardiomyopathies. More than 550,000 new

Physical Signs cases are diagnosed each year in the United States, where the

Diagnostic Studies current prevalence is approximately 5.8 million. The number

Prognosis of patients with heart failure is increasing, not only because
Treatment Of Heart Failure With — : : ;
: : the population is aging but also because of interventions

Reduced Kection Fraction . . _.

Diuretics that prolong survival after damaging cardiac insults such as
myocardial infarction. As a result, heart failure now accounts
for more than 12 million medical offce visits annually and

220
Heart Failure 221
Experimental studies of isolated cardiac muscle segments have revealed several impor-
tant principles that can be applied to the intact heart. As a muscle segment is stretched
apart, the relation between its length and the tension it passively develops is curvilin-
ear, reflecting its intrinsic elastic properties (Fig. 9-1A, lower curve). If the muscle is
frst passively stretched and then stimulated to contract while its ends are held at fxed
d

cS) S)

c b c

2 Ss

77] wn

5 5

F r ef Abe

SA
c c
a a
Muscle length (mm) Muscle length (mm)
A B
r + norepinephrine
f

S

2

uv

c

o

- g

L a
Muscle length (mm)

Cc
HGURE9-1. Physiology of normal cardiac muscle segments. A. Passive (lower curve) and total (upper
curve) length-tension relations for isolated cat papillary muscle. Lines ab and cd represent the force developed
during isometric contractions. Initial passive muscle length c is longer (i.e., has been stretched more) than
length a and therefore has a greater passive tension. When the muscle segments are stimulated to contract,
the muscle with the longer initial length generates greater total tension (point d vs. point b). B If the
muscle fber preparation is allowed to shorten against a f xed load, the length at the end of the contraction
is dependent on the load but not the initial fber length; stimulation at point a or c results in the same f nal
f ber length (e). Thus, the muscle that starts at length c shortens a greater distance (AL) than the muscle at
length a (AL,). C The uppermost curve is the length-tension relation in the presence of the positive inotropic
agent norepinephrine. For any given initial length, an isometric contraction in the presence of norepinephrine
generates greater force (point f) than one in the absence of norepinephrine (point b). When contracting
against a fxed load, the presence of norepinephrine causes greater muscle fber shortening and a smaller fnal
muscle length (point g) compared with contraction in the absence of the inotropic agent (point e). (Adapted
from Downing SE, Sonnenblick FH. Cardiac muscle mechanics and ventricular performance: force and time
parameters. Am J Physiol. 1964;207:705—715.)
222 (chapter 9

positions (termed an isometric contraction), the total tension (the sum of active plus
passive tension) generated by the f bers is proportional to the length of the muscle at the
time of stimulation (see Fig. 9-1A, upper curve). That is, stretching the muscle before
stimulation optimizes the overlap and interaction of myosin and actin f laments, increas-
ing the number of cross bridges and the force of contraction. Stretching cardiac muscle
fbers also increases the sensitivity of the myoflaments to calcium, which further aug-
ments force development.

This relationship between the initial f ber length and force development is of great impor-
tance in the intact heart: within a physiologic range, the larger the ventricular volume during
diastole, the more the fbers are stretched before stimulation and the greater the force of the
next contraction. This is the basis of the Frank-Starling relationship, the observation that
ventricular output increases in relation to the preload (the stretch on the myocardial f bers
before contraction).

A second observation from isolated muscle experiments arises when the fbers are not
tethered at a f xed length but are allowed to shorten during stimulation against a f xed load
(termed the afterload). In this situation (termed an isotonic contraction), the fnal length of
the muscle at the end of contraction is determined by the magnitude of the load but is inde-
pendent of the length of the muscle before stimulation (see Fig. 9-1B). That is, (1) the tension
generated by the f ber is equal to the f xed load; (2) the greater the load opposing contraction,
the less the muscle fber can shorten; (3) if the fber is stretched to a longer length before
stimulation but the afterload is kept constant, the muscle will shorten a greater distance to
attain the same fnal length at the end of contraction; and (4) the maximum tension that can
be produced during isotonic contraction (i.e., using a load suffciently great such that the
muscle is just unable to shorten) is the same as the force produced by an isometric contrac-
tion at that initial f ber length.

This concept of afterload is also relevant to the intact heart: the pressure generated by
the ventricle and the size of the chamber at the end of each contraction depend on the load
against which the ventricle contracts but are independent of the stretch on the myocardial
f bers before contraction.

A third key experimental observation relates to myocardial contractility, which accounts
for changes in the force of contraction independent of the initial f ber length and afterload.
Contractility reflects chemical and hormonal influences on cardiac contraction, such as expo-
sure to catecholamines. When contractility is enhanced pharmacologically (e.g., by a nor-
epinephrine infusion), the relation between initial fber length and force developed during
contraction is shifted upward (see Fig. 9-1C) such that a greater total tension develops with
isometric contraction at any given preload. Similarly, when contractility is augmented and
the cardiac muscle is allowed to shorten against a fxed afterload, the fber contracts to a
greater extent and achieves a shorter fnal f ber length compared with the baseline state. At
the molecular level, enhanced contractility is likely related to an increased cycling rate of
actin—myosin cross-bridge formation.

Determinants of Gontractile Function in the Intact Heart
In a healthy person, cardiac output is matched to the body’s total metabolic need. Cardiac
output (CO) is equal to the product of stroke volume (SV, the volume of blood ejected with
each contraction) and the heart rate (HR):
CO =SV x HR

The three major determinants of stroke volume are preload, afterload, and myocardial

contractility, as shown in Figure 9-2.
Heart Failure 223
Preload
The concept of preload (Table 9-1) in the
intact heart was described by physiologists
Frank and Starling a century ago. In exper-
imental preparations, they showed that
within physiologic limits, the more a nor-
mal ventricle is distended (i.e., fled with
blood) during diastole, the greater the vol-
ume that is ejected during the next systolic
contraction. This relationship is illustrated
graphically by the Frank-Starling curve, —{GURE9-2. key mediators of cardiac output.
also known as the ventricular function Determinants of the stroke volume include contractility,
curve (Fig. 9-3). The graph relates a mea- __ preload, and afterload. Gardiac output = heart rate
surement of cardiac performance (such as __ Stroke volume.
cardiac output or stroke volume) on the
vertical axis as a function of preload on the horizontal axis. As described earlier, the pre-
load can be thought of as the amount of myocardial stretch at the end of diastole, just
before contraction. Measurements that correlate with myocardial stretch, and that are often
used to indicate the preload on the horizontal axis, are the ventricular end-diastolic vol-
ume (EDV) or end-diastolic pressure (EDP). Conditions that decrease intravascular volume,
and thereby reduce ventricular preload (e.g., dehydration or severe hemorrhage), result
in a smaller EDV and hence a reduced stroke volume during contraction. Conversely, an
increased volume within the left ventricle during diastole (e.g., a large intravenous fluid
infusion) results in a greater-than-normal stroke volume.
Ferm Def nition
Preload The ventricular wall tension at the end of diastole. In clinical terms, it
is the stretch on the ventricular fibers just before contraction, often
approximated by the end-diastolic volume or end-diastolic pressure.
Afterload The ventricular wall tension during contraction; the force that must be
overcome for the ventricle to eject its contents. Often approximated by
the systolic ventricular (or arterial) pressure
Contractility (inotropic state) Property of heart muscle that accounts for changes in the strength
of contraction, independent of the preload and afterload. Ref ects
chemical or hormonal inf uences (e.g., catecholamines) on the force of
contraction
Stroke volume (SV) Volume of blood ejected from the ventricle during systole
SV= End-diastolic volume — end-systolic volume
ection fraction (EF) The fraction of end-diastolic volume ejected from the ventricle during
each systolic contraction (normal range = 55%-75%)
EF = Stroke volume ~+ end-diastolic volume
Cardiac output (CO) Volume of blood ejected from the ventricle per minute
CO= SV Heart rate
@mopliance Intrinsic property of a chamber that describes its pressure—volume
relationship during filling. Reflects the ease or difficulty with
which the chamber can be filled. G@mpliance = A volume +
A pressure
a
224 (chapter 9
Increased
contractility
Normal
a
aa Heart failure
Pulmonary congestion
TP
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure
(or end-diastolic volume)
HGURE9-3. Left ventricular (LV) performance (Frank—Starling) curves relate preload, measured as LV end-
diastolic volume (EDV) or pressure (EDP), to cardiac performance, measured as ventricular stroke volume
or cardiac output. On the curve of a normal heart (middle line), cardiac performance continuously increases as
a function of preload. States of increased contractility (e.g., norepinephrine infusion) are characterized by an
augmented stroke volume at any level of preload (upper line). Gonversely, decreased LV contractility (commonly
associated with heart failure) is characterized by a curve that is shifted downward (lower line). Point a is an
example of a normal person at rest. Point b represents the same person after developing systolic dysfunction and
heart failure (e.g., after a large myocardial infarction): stroke volume has fallen, and the decreased LVemptying
results in elevation of the EDV Because point b is on the ascending portion of the curve, the elevated EDV serves
a compensatory role because it results in an increase in subsequent stroke volume, albeit much less than if
operating on the normal curve. Further augmentation of LV filling (e.g., increased circulating volume) in the heart
failure patient is represented by point c, which resides on the relatively fat part of the curve: stroke volume is
only slightly augmented, but the significantly increased EDP results in pulmonary congestion.
Afterload
Afterload (see Table 9-1) in the intact heart reflects the resistance that the ventricle must
overcome to empty its contents. It is more formally def ned as the ventricular wall stress that
develops during systolic ejection. Wall stress (o), like pressure, is expressed as force per unit
area and, for the left ventricle, may be estimated from Laplace relationship:
Pxr
S =
2h
where P is ventricular pressure, r is ventricular chamber radius, and h is ventricular wall
thickness. Thus, ventricular wall stress rises in response to a higher pressure load (e.g.,
hypertension) or an increased chamber size (e.g., a dilated left ventricle). Conversely, as
would be expected from Laplace relationship, an increase in wall thickness (h) serves a com-
pensatory role in reducing wall stress, because the force is distributed over a greater mass per
unit surface area of ventricular muscle.
Contractility (Also Termed “Inotropic State”)
In the intact heart, as in the isolated muscle preparation, contractility accounts for changes in
myocardial force for a given set of preload and afterload conditions, resulting from chemical
Heart Failure 225
and hormonal influences. By relating a measure of ventricular performance (stroke volume
or cardiac output) to preload (left ventricular EDP or EDV), each Frank—Starling curve is a
reflection of the heart’s current inotropic state (see Fig. 9-3). The effect on stroke volume by
an alteration in preload is reflected by a change in position along a particular Frank—Starling
curve. Conversely, a change in contractility shifts the entire curve in an upward or downward
direction. Thus, when contractility is enhanced pharmacologically (e.g., by an infusion of
norepinephrine), the ventricular performance curve is displaced upward such that at any
given preload, the stroke volume is increased. Conversely, when a drug that reduces contrac-
tility is administered, or the ventricle’s contractile function is impaired (as in certain types
of heart failure), the curve shifts in a downward direction, leading to reductions in stroke
volume and cardiac output at any given preload.

Pressure—Volume Loops
Another useful graphic display to illustrate the determinants of cardiac function is the ven-
tricular pressure-volume loop, which relates changes in ventricular volume to correspond-
ing changes in pressure throughout the cardiac cycle (Fig. 9-4). In the left ventricle, fIling
of the chamber begins after the mitral valve opens in early diastole (point a). The curve
between points a and b represents diastolic f lling. As the volume increases during diastole,
x
Stroke
Isovolumetric < ~ volume >| | Isovolumetric
relaxation (= EDV— ESV) contraction
—__ Lb
a
| |
I |
I |
ESV EDV
Volume (mL)
HGURE9-4. Example of a normal left ventricular (LV) pressure—volume loop. At point a, the mitral valve
(MV) opens and fling of the LVcommences. During passive diastolic flling of the LV(line ab), its volume
increases with a gradual rise in pressure. When ventricular contraction commences and its pressure exceeds
that of the left atrium, the MV closes (point b) and isovolumetric contraction of the LVensues (the aortic valve
is not yet open, and no blood leaves the chamber), as shown by line bc. When LVpressure rises to that in the
aorta, the aortic valve (AV) opens (point c) and ejection begins. The volume within the LVdeclines during
ejection (line cd), but LVpressure continues to rise until ventricular relaxation commences, then it begins to
lessen. At point d, the LVpressure during relaxation falls below that in the aorta, and the AV closes, leading
to isovolumetric relaxation (line da). As LVpressure declines further to below that in the left atrium, the MV
reopens (point a). Point b represents the end-diastolic volume (EDV) and pressure, and point d is the end-
systolic volume (ESV) and pressure. Stroke volume is calculated as the difference between the EDVand ESV
226 Chapter 9
it is associated with a small rise in pressure, in accordance with the passive length—tension
properties or compliance (see Table 9-1) of the myocardium, analogous to the lower curve in
Figure 9-1A for an isolated muscle preparation.

Next, the onset of left ventricular systolic contraction causes the ventricular pressure to
rise. When the pressure in the left ventricle (LV) exceeds that of the left atrium (point b), the
mitral valve is forced to close. As the pressure continues to increase, the ventricular volume
does not immediately change, because the aortic valve has not yet opened; therefore, this
phase is called isovolumetric contraction. When the rise in ventricular pressure reaches
the aortic diastolic pressure, the aortic valve is forced to open (point c) and ejection of blood
into the aorta commences. During ejection, the volume within the ventricle decreases, but
its pressure continues to rise until ventricular relaxation begins. The pressure against which
the ventricle ejects (a component of afterload) is represented by the curve cd. Ejection ends
during the relaxation phase, when the ventricular pressure falls below that of the aorta and
the aortic valve closes (point d).

As the ventricle continues to relax, its pressure declines while its volume remains constant
because the mitral valve has not yet opened (this phase is known as isovolumetric relax-
ation). When the ventricular pressure falls below that of the left atrium, the mitral valve
opens again (point a) and the cycle repeats.

Note that point b represents the pressure and volume at the end of diastole, whereas point
d represents the pressure and volume at the end of systole. The difference between the EDV
and end-systolic volume (ESV) represents the quantity of blood ejected during contraction
(i.e., the stroke volume).

Changes in any of the determinants of cardiac function are reflected by alterations in the
pressure-volume loop. By analyzing the effects of a change in an individual parameter (pre-
load, afterload, or contractility) on the pressure-volume relationship, the resulting modif ca-
tions in ventricular pressure and stroke volume can be predicted (Fig. 9-5).

Alterations in Preload
If afterload and contractility are held constant but preload is caused to increase (e.g., by
administration of intravenous fluid), left ventricular EDV rises. This increase in preload aug-
ments the stroke volume via the Frank—Starling mechanism such that the ESV achieved is the
same as it was before increasing the preload (see Fig. 9-5A). This means that the normal left
ventricle is able to adjust its stroke volume and effectively empty its contents to match its
diastolic f lling volume, as long as contractility and afterload are kept constant.

Although EDV and EDP are often used interchangeably as markers of preload, the relation-
ship between f lling volume and pressure (i.e., ventricular compliance; see Table 9-1) largely
governs the extent of ventricular f lling. If ventricular compliance is reduced (e.g., in severe
LV hypertrophy), the slope of the diastolic flling curve (segment ab in Fig. 9-4) becomes
steeper. A “stiff” or poorly compliant ventricle reduces the ability of the chamber to fll dur-
ing diastole, resulting in a lower-than-normal ventricular EDV. In this circumstance, the stroke
volume will be reduced while the ESV remains unchanged.

Alterations in Aftenoad

If preload and contractility are held constant and afterload is augmented (e.g., in high-
impedance states such as hypertension or aortic stenosis), the pressure generated by the
left ventricle during ejection increases. In this situation, more ventricular work is expended
in overcoming the resistance to ejection and therefore less f ber shortening takes place. As
shown in Figure 9-5B, an increase in afterload results in a higher ventricular systolic pressure
and a greater-than-normal LV ESV. Thus, in the setting of increased afterload, the ventricular
stroke volume (EDV-ESV) is reduced.
Heart Failure 227
R\y
S&S
ESV
“SEDV
Volume (mL) Volume (mL)
A B
v
SS
g >
GY »y
X
¢¥
Volume (mL)
Cc
HGURE9-5. The effect of varying preload, afterload, and contractility on the pressure—volume loop.
A. When arterial pressure (afterload) and contractility are held constant, sequential increases (lines 1, 2,
and 3) in preload (measured in this case as end-diastolic volume [EDV]) are associated with loops that have
progressively higher stroke volumes but a constant end-systolic volume (ESV). B. When the preload (EDV) and
contractility are held constant, sequential increases (points 1, 2, and 3) in arterial pressure (afterload) are
associated with loops that have progressively lower stroke volumes and higher end-systolic volumes. There is
a nearly linear relationship between the afterload and ESV termed the end-systolic pressure—volume relation
(ESPVR). C A positive inotropic intervention shifts the end-systolic pressure—volume relation upward and
leftward from ESPVR-1 to ESPVR-2, resulting in loop 2, which has a larger stroke volume and a smaller end-
systolic volume than the original loop 1.

The dependence of the ESV on afterload is approximately linear: the greater the afterload,
the higher the ESV. This relationship is depicted in Figure 9-5 as the end-systolic pressure—
volume relation (ESPVR) and is analogous to the total tension curve in the isolated muscle
experiments described earlier.

Alterations in Qontractility
The slope of the ESPVR line on the pressure—volume loop graph is a function of cardiac con-
tractility. In conditions of increased contractility, the ESPVR slope becomes steeper; that is,
it shifts upward and toward the left. Hence, at any given preload or afterload, the ventricle
empties more completely (the stroke volume increases) and results in a smaller-than-normal
ESV (see Fig. 9-5C). Conversely, in situations of reduced contractility, the ESPVR line shifts
228 chapter 9
downward, consistent with a decline in stroke volume and a higher ESV. Thus, the ESV is
dependent on the afterload against which the ventricle contracts and the inotropic state, but
is independent of the EDV prior to contraction.
The important physiologic concepts in this section are summarized here:
1. Ventricular stroke volume is a function of preload, afterload, and contractility. SV rises
when there is an increase in preload, a decrease in afterload, or augmented contractility.
2. Ventricular EDV (or EDP) is used as a representation of preload. The EDV is influenced by
the chamber’s compliance.
3. Ventricular ESV depends on the afterload and contractility but not on the preload.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Chronic heart failure may result from a wide variety of cardiovascular insults. The etiologies
can be grouped into those that (1) impair ventricular contractility, (2) increase afterload,
or (3) impair ventricular relaxation and flling (Fig. 9-6). Heart failure that results from
an abnormality of ventricular emptying (due to impaired contractility or greatly excessive
afterload) is termed systolic dysfunction, whereas heart failure caused by abnormalities of
diastolic relaxation or ventricular f lling is termed diastolic dysfunction. However, there is
much overlap, and many patients demonstrate both systolic and diastolic abnormalities.
As a result, it is common to categorize heart failure patients into two general categories
1. Coronary artery disease 1. Advanced aortic stenosis
* Myocardial infarction 2. Uncontrolled severe
¢ Transient myocardial hypertension
ischemia
2. Chronic volume overload
¢ Mitral re gurgita tion
¢ Aortic regurgitation
3. Dilated cardiomyopathies
HGURE 9-6. Qnditions that
cause left-sided heart failure
through impairment of ventricular
. systolic or diastolic function.
“Note that in chronic stable stages,
2. Restrictive cardiomyopathy the conditions in this box (aortic
3. Myocardial fibrosis stenosis, hypertension) may instead
4. Transient myocardial ischemia result in heart failure with preserved
5. Pericardial constriction or FE due to compensatory ventricular
tamponade hypertrophy and increased diastolic
stiffness (diastolic dysfunction).
Heart Failure 229
based on the left ventricular ejection fraction (EF), a measure of cardiac performance
(see Table 9-1): (1) heart failure with reduced EF (i.e., primarily systolic dysfunction)
and (2) heart failure with preserved EF (i.e., primarily diastolic dysfunction). In the
United States, approximately one half of patients with heart failure fall into each of these
categories.

Heart Failure with Reduced EF
In states of systolic dysfunction, the affected ventricle has a diminished capacity to eject
blood because of impaired myocardial contractility or pressure overload (i.e., excessive after-
load). Loss of contractility may result from destruction of myocytes, abnormal myocyte func-
tion, or f brosis. Pressure overload impairs ventricular ejection by signif cantly increasing
resistance to flow.

Figure 9-7A depicts the effects of systolic dysfunction due to impaired contractility on the
pressure-volume loop. The ESPVR is shifted downward such that systolic emptying ceases
at a higher-than-normal ESV. As a result, the stroke volume falls. When normal pulmonary
venous return is added to the increased ESV that has remained in the ventricle because of
incomplete emptying, the diastolic chamber volume increases, resulting in a higher-than-
normal EDV and pressure. While that increase in preload induces a compensatory rise in
stroke volume (via the Frank—Starling mechanism), impaired contractility and the reduced EF
cause the ESV to remain elevated.

During diastole, the persistently elevated LV pressure is transmitted to the left atrium
(through the open mitral valve) and to the pulmonary veins and capillaries. An elevated pul-
monary capillary hydrostatic pressure, when suff ciently high (usually greater than 20 mm Hg),
results in the transudation of fluid into the pulmonary interstitium and symptoms of pulmo-
nary congestion.

(1)
2)
p 1
| O)
D
——_ Diastolic pres sure—
2 7 volume curve
Volume (mL) Volume (mL)
A B
HGURE9-7. The pressure—volume loop in systolic and diastolic dysfunction. A. The normal pressure—
volume loop (solid line) is compared with one demonstrating systolic dysfunction (dashed blue line). In
systolic dysfunction caused by decreased cardiac contractility, the end-systolic pressure—volume relation is
shifted downward and rightward (from line | to line 2). As a result, the end-systolic volume (ESV) is increased
(arrow). As normal venous return is added to that greater-than-normal ESV there is an obligatory increase
in the end-diastolic volume (EDV) and pressure (preload), which serves a compensatory function by partially
elevating stroke volume toward normal via the Frank—Starling mechanism. B The pressure—volume loop
of diastolic dysfunction resulting from increased stiffness of the ventricle (dashed blue line). The passive
diastolic pressure—volume curve is shifted upward (from line | to line 2) such that at any diastolic volume, the
ventricular pressure is higher than normal. The result is a decreased EDV (arrow) because of reduced f lling of
the stiffened ventricle at a higher-than-normal end-diastolic pressure.
230) Ghapter9

Heart Failure with Preserved EF
Patients who exhibit heart failure with preserved EF frequently demonstrate abnormalities of
ventricular diastolic function: impaired early diastolic relaxation (an active, energy-dependent
process), increased stiffness of the ventricular wall (a passive property), or both. Acute myo-
cardial ischemia is an example of a condition that transiently inhibits energy delivery and
diastolic relaxation. Conversely, left ventricular hypertrophy, f brosis, or restrictive cardiomy-
opathy (see Chapter 10) causes the LV walls to become chronically stiffened. Certain pericardial
diseases (cardiac tamponade and pericardial constriction, as described in Chapter 14) present
an external force that limits ventricular f lling and represent potentially reversible forms of dia-
stolic dysfunction. The effect of impaired diastolic function is reflected in the pressure-volume
loop (see Fig. 9-7B): in diastole, f lling of the ventricle occurs at higher-than-normal pressures
because the lower part of the loop is shifted upward as a result of reduced chamber compli-
ance. Patients with diastolic dysfunction often manifest signs of vascular congestion because
the elevated diastolic pressure is transmitted retrograde to the pulmonary and systemic veins.

Right-Sided Heart Failure
Whereas the physiologic principles described above may be applied to both right-sided and
left-sided heart failure, there are distinct differences in function between the two ventricles.
Compared with the left ventricle, the right ventricle (RV) is a thin-walled, highly compliant
chamber that accepts its blood volume at low pressures and ejects against a low pulmonary
vascular resistance. As a result of its high compliance, the RV has little diff culty accepting a
wide range of flling volumes without marked changes in its f lling pressure. Conversely, the
RV is quite susceptible to failure in situations that present a sudden increase in afterload, such
as acute pulmonary embolism.

The most common cause of right-sided heart failure is actually the presence of left-sided
heart failure (Table 9-2). In this situation, excessive afterload confronts the RV because of the
elevated pulmonary vascular pressures that result from LV dysfunction. Isolated right heart
failure is less common and usually reflects increased RV afterload owing to diseases of the
lung parenchyma or pulmonary vasculature. Right-sided heart disease that results from a
primary pulmonary process is known as cor pulmonale, which may lead to symptoms of right
heart failure.

When the RV fails, the elevated diastolic pressure is transmitted retrograde to the right
atrium with subsequent congestion of the systemic veins, accompanied by signs of right-sided
heart failure as described below. Indirectly, isolated right heart failure may also influence left
heart function: the decreased right ventricular output reduces blood return to the LV (.e.,
diminished preload), causing left ventricular stroke volume to decline.

Cardiac causes

Left-sided heart failure

Pulmonic valve stenosis

Right ventricular infarction

Pulmonary parenchymal diseases

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

Interstitial lung disease (e.g., sarcoidosis)

Chronic lung infection or bronchiectasis

Pulmonary vascular diseases

Pulmonary embolism

Pulmonary arteriolar hypertension
I
art Failure 231
COVPENSATORY MECHANISMS
Several natural compensatory mechanisms are called into action in patients with heart failure
that buffer the fall in cardiac output and help preserve suff cient blood pressure (BP) to perfuse
vital organs. These compensations include (1) the Frank—Starling mechanism, (2) neurohor-
monal alterations, and (3) the development of ventricular hypertrophy and remodeling (Fig. 9-8).
Frank—Starling Mechanism
As shown in Figure 9-3, heart failure caused by impaired left ventricular contractile function
causes a downward shift of the ventricular performance curve. Consequently, at a given pre-
load, stroke volume is decreased compared with normal. The reduced stroke volume results
in incomplete chamber emptying, so that the volume of blood that accumulates in the ven-
tricle during diastole is higher than normal (see Fig. 9-3, point b). This increased stretch on
the myof bers, acting via the Frank—Starling mechanism, induces a greater stroke volume on
subsequent contraction, which helps to empty the enlarged left ventricle and preserve for-
ward cardiac output (see Fig. 9-8).

This benef cial compensatory mechanism has its limits, however. In the case of severe
heart failure with marked depression of contractility, the curve may be nearly flat at higher
diastolic volumes, reducing the augmentation of cardiac output achieved by the increased
chamber f lling. Concurrently in such a circumstance, marked elevation of the EDV and pres-
sure (which is transmitted retrograde to the left atrium, pulmonary veins, and capillaries)
may result in pulmonary congestion and edema (see Fig. 9-3, point c).

Neurohormonal Alterations

Several important neurohormonal compensatory mechanisms are activated in heart failure
in response to the decreased cardiac output (Fig. 9-9). Three of the most important involve
(1) the adrenergic nervous system, (2) the renin—angiotensin—aldosterone system, and (3)
increased production of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). In part, these mechanisms serve to
increase systemic vascular resistance, which helps to maintain arterial perfusion to vital

eee” ~ Re

¢ x
re an
eA
® new Stay, & TT
is eta 4 ORAL
nN a“
Contractile 1°

HGURE9-8. G@mpensatory mechanisms in heart failure. Both the Frank—Starling mechanism (which is
invoked by the rise in ventricular end-diastolic volume) and increased contractile force (due to myocardial
hypertrophy from augmented wall stress and neurohormonal activation) serve to maintain forward stroke
volume (dashed green arrows). However, the chronic rise in end-diastolic volume and myocardial hypertrophy
passively augment atrial pressure (red arrows), which may in turn contribute to symptoms of heart failure
(e.g., pulmonary congestion in the case of left-sided heart failure).
232 chapter 9
——— Cardiac Output
© ©
©
HGURE 9-9. G@mpensatory neurohormonal stimulation develops in response to the reduced forward
cardiac output and blood pressure of heart failure. Increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system,
renin—angiotensin—aldosterone system, and antidiuretic hormone serves to support the cardiac output and
blood pressure (boxes). However, adverse consequences of these activations (red lines) include an increase in
afterload from excessive vasoconstriction (which may then impede cardiac output) and excess f uid retention,
which contributes to peripheral edema and pulmonary congestion.
organs, even in the setting of a reduced cardiac output. That is, because blood pressure (BP)
is equal to the product of cardiac output (CO) and total peripheral resistance (TPR),
BP = CO x TPR
a rise in TPR induced by these compensatory mechanisms can nearly balance the fall in CO
and, in the early stages of heart failure, maintain fairly normal BP. In addition, neurohormonal
activation results in salt and water retention, which in turn increases intravascular volume
and left ventricular preload, maximizing stroke volume via the Frank—Starling mechanism.
Although the acute effects of neurohormonal stimulation are compensatory and benef cial,
chronic activation of these mechanisms often ultimately proves deleterious to the failing heart
and contributes to a progressive downhill course, as described later.
Adrenergic Nervous System
The fall in cardiac output in heart failure is sensed by baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and
aortic arch. These receptors decrease their rate of fring in proportion to the fall in BP, and
the signal is transmitted by the 9th and 10th cranial nerves to the cardiovascular control
Heart Failure 233
center in the medulla. As a consequence, sympathetic outflow to the heart and peripheral
circulation is enhanced, and parasympathetic tone is diminished. There are three immediate
consequences (see Fig. 9-9): (1) an increase in heart rate, (2) augmentation of ventricular
contractility, and (3) vasoconstriction caused by stimulation of a-receptors on the systemic
veins and arteries.

The increased heart rate and ventricular contractility directly augment cardiac output (see
Fig. 9-2). Vasoconstriction of the venous and arterial circulations is also initially benef cial.
Venous constriction augments blood return to the heart, which increases preload and raises
stroke volume through the Frank—Starling mechanism, as long as the ventricle is operating on
the ascending portion of its ventricular performance curve. Arteriolar constriction increases
the peripheral vascular resistance and therefore helps to maintain blood pressure (BP = CO x
TPR). The regional distribution of a-receptors is such that during sympathetic stimulation,
blood flow is redistributed to vital organs (e.g., heart and brain) at the expense of the skin,
splanchnic viscera, and kidneys.

Renin—Angiotensin—Aldosterone System
This system is also activated early in patients with heart failure (see Fig. 9-9), mediated by
increased renin release. The main stimuli for renin secretion from the juxtaglomerular cells
of the kidney in heart failure patients include (1) decreased renal artery perfusion pressure
secondary to low cardiac output, (2) decreased salt delivery to the macula densa of the kidney
owing to alterations in intrarenal hemodynamics, and (3) direct stimulation of juxtaglomeru-
lar B-receptors by the activated adrenergic nervous system.

Renin is an enzyme that cleaves circulating angiotensinogen to form angiotensin I,
which is then rapidly cleaved by endothelial cell-bound angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) to form angiotensin II (AID), a potent vasoconstrictor (see Chapter 13). Increased AII
constricts arterioles and raises total peripheral resistance, thereby serving to maintain sys-
temic blood pressure. In addition, AII acts to increase intravascular volume by two mecha-
nisms: (1) at the hypothalamus, it stimulates thirst and therefore water intake, and (2) at
the adrenal cortex, it acts to increase aldosterone secretion. The latter hormone promotes
sodium reabsorption from the distal convoluted tubule of the kidney into the circulation
(see Chapter 17), serving to augment intravascular volume. The rise in intravascular vol-
ume increases left ventricular preload and thereby augments cardiac output via the Frank—
Starling mechanism in patients on the ascending portion of the ventricular performance
curve (see Fig. 9-3).

Antidiuretic Hormone
Secretion of this hormone (also termed vasopressin) by the posterior pituitary is increased
in many patients with heart failure, presumably mediated through arterial baroreceptors,
and by increased levels of AII. ADH contributes to increased intravascular volume because
it promotes water retention in the distal nephron. The increased intravascular volume serves
to augment left ventricular preload and cardiac output. ADH also appears to contribute to
systemic vasoconstriction.

Although each of these neurohormonal alterations in heart failure is initially benef cial,
continued activation ultimately proves harmful. For example, the increased circulating vol-
ume and augmented venous return to the heart may eventually worsen engorgement of the
lung vasculature, exacerbating congestive pulmonary symptoms. Furthermore, the elevated
arteriolar resistance increases the afterload against which the failing left ventricle con-
tracts and may therefore ultimately impair stroke volume and reduce cardiac output (see
Fig. 9-9). In addition, the increased heart rate augments metabolic demand and can there-
fore further reduce the performance of the failing heart. Continuous sympathetic activation
234 (chapter 9
results in down-regulation of cardiac B-adrenergic receptors and up-regulation of inhibitory
G proteins, contributing to a decrease in the myocardium’s sensitivity to circulating cat-
echolamines and a reduced inotropic response.

Chronically elevated levels of All and aldosterone have additional detrimental effects. They
provoke the production of cytokines (small proteins that mediate cell-cell communication
and immune responses), activate macrophages, and stimulate f broblasts, resulting in f brosis
and adverse remodeling of the failing heart.

Because the undesired consequences of chronic neurohormonal activation eventually out-
weigh the benefts, much of today’s pharmacologic therapy of heart failure is designed to
moderate these “compensatory” mechanisms, as examined later in the chapter.

Natriuretic Peptides

In contrast to the ultimately adverse consequences of the neurohormonal alterations
described in the previous section, the natriuretic peptides are natural “benef cial” hormones
secreted in heart failure in response to increased intracardiac pressures. The best studied of
these are atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP). ANP is stored
in atrial cells and is released in response to atrial distention. BNP is not detected in normal
hearts but is produced when ventricular myocardium is subjected to hemodynamic stress
(e.g., in heart failure or during myocardial infarction). Clinical studies have shown a close
relationship between serum BNP levels and the severity of heart failure.

Actions of the natriuretic peptides are mediated by specif c natriuretic receptors and are
largely opposite to those of the other hormone systems activated in heart failure. They result
in excretion of sodium and water, vasodilatation, inhibition of renin secretion, and antago-
nism of the effects of AII on aldosterone and vasopressin levels. Although these effects are
benef cial to patients with heart failure, they are usually not suff cient to fully counteract the
vasoconstriction and volume-retaining effects of the other activated hormonal systems.

Other Peptides
Among other peptides that are generated in heart failure is endothelin-1, a potent vasocon-
strictor, derived from endothelial cells lining the vasculature (see Chapter 6). In patients
with heart failure, the plasma concentration of endothelin-1 correlates with disease severity
and adverse outcomes. Drugs designed to inhibit endothelin receptors (and therefore blunt
adverse vasoconstriction) improve LV function, but long-term clinical benef ts have not been
demonstrated in heart failure patients.
Ventricular Hypertrophy and Remodeling

Ventricular hypertrophy and remodeling are important compensatory processes that
develop over time in response to hemodynamic burdens. Wall stress (as def ned earlier)
is often increased in developing heart failure because of either LV dilatation (increased
chamber radius) or the need to generate high systolic pressures to overcome excessive
afterload (e.g., in aortic stenosis or hypertension). A sustained increase in wall stress
(along with neurohormonal and cytokine alterations) stimulates the development of myo-
cardial hypertrophy and deposition of extracellular matrix. This increased mass of mus-
cle fbers serves as a compensatory mechanism that helps to maintain contractile force
and counteracts the elevated ventricular wall stress (recall that wall thickness is in the
denominator of the Laplace wall stress formula). However, because of the increased stiff-
ness of the hypertrophied wall, these benef ts come at the expense of higher-than-normal
diastolic ventricular pressures, which are transmitted to the left atrium and pulmonary
vasculature (see Fig. 9-8).
Heart Failure 235

The pattern of compensatory hypertrophy and remodeling that develops depends on
whether the ventricle is subjected to chronic volume or pressure overload. Chronic chamber
dilatation owing to volume overload (e.g., chronic mitral or aortic regurgitation) results in the
synthesis of new sarcomeres in series with the old, causing the myocytes to elongate. The
radius of the ventricular chamber therefore enlarges, doing so in proportion to the increase in
wall thickness, and is termed eccentric hypertrophy. Chronic pressure overload (e.g., caused
by hypertension or aortic stenosis) results in the synthesis of new sarcomeres in parallel with
the old (i.e., the myocytes thicken), termed concentric hypertrophy. In this situation, the
wall thickness increases without proportional chamber dilatation, and wall stress may there-
fore be reduced substantially.

Such hypertrophy and remodeling help to reduce wall stress and maintain contractile force,
but ultimately, ventricular function may decline further, allowing the chamber to dilate out
of proportion to wall thickness. When this occurs, the excessive hemodynamic burden on the
contractile units produces a downward spiral of deterioration with progressive heart failure
symptomatology.

MYOCYTE LOSS AND CELLULAR DYSFUNCTION

Impairment of ventricular function in heart failure may result from the actual loss of myocytes
and/or impaired function of living myocytes. The loss of myocytes may result from cellular
necrosis (e.g., from myocardial infarction or exposure to cardiotoxic drugs such as doxorubi-
cin) or apoptosis (programmed cell death). In apoptosis, genetic instructions activate intra-
cellular pathways that cause the cell to fragment and undergo phagocytosis by other cells,
without an inflammatory response. Implicated triggers of apoptosis in heart failure include
elevated catecholamines, AII, inflammatory cytokines, and mechanical strain on the myocytes
owing to the augmented wall stress.

Even viable myocardium in heart failure is abnormal at the ultrastructural and molecular
levels. Mechanical wall stress, neurohormonal activation, and inflammatory cytokines, such
as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), are believed to alter the genetic expression of contractile
proteins, ion channels, catalytic enzymes, surface receptors, and secondary messengers
in the myocyte. Experimental evidence has demonstrated such changes at the subcellu-
lar level that affect intracellular calcium handling by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, decrease
the responsiveness of the myof laments to calcium, impair excitation—contraction coupling,
and alter cellular energy production. Cellular mechanisms currently considered the most
important contributors to dysfunction in heart failure include (1) a reduced cellular ability
to maintain calcium homeostasis and/or (2) changes in the production, availability, and
utilization of high-energy phosphates. However, the exact subcellular alterations that result
in heart failure have not yet been unraveled, and this is an active area of cardiovascular
research.

PREC PITATING FACTORS
Many patients with heart failure remain asymptomatic for extended periods either because the
impairment is mild or because cardiac dysfunction is balanced by the compensatory mecha-
nisms described earlier. Often, clinical manifestations are precipitated by circumstances that
increase the cardiac workload and tip the balanced state into one of decompensation.

Common precipitating factors are listed in Table 9-3. For example, conditions of increased
metabolic demand such as fever or infection may not be matched by a suffcient increase
in output by the failing heart, so that symptoms of cardiac insuff ciency are precipitated.
Tachyarrhythmias precipitate heart failure by decreasing diastolic ventricular f lling time and
by increasing myocardial oxygen demand. Excessively low heart rates directly cause a drop in
cardiac output (remember, cardiac output = stroke volume x heart rate). An increase in salt
236 Chapter 9
Increased metabolic demands
Fever
Infection
Anemia
Tachycardia
Hyperthyroidism
Pregnancy
Increased circulating volume (increased preload)
Excessive sodium content in diet
Excessive f uid administration
Renal failure
Qnditions that increase afterload
Uncontrolled hypertension
Pulmonary embolism (increased right ventricular afterload)
Qnditions that impair contractility
Negative inotropic medications
Myocardial ischemia or infarction
Failure to take prescribed heart failure medications
Excessively slow heart rate
Cee eee
ingestion, renal dysfunction, or failure to take prescribed diuretic medications may increase
the circulating volume, thus promoting systemic and pulmonary congestion. Uncontrolled
hypertension depresses systolic function because of excessive afterload. A large pulmonary
embolism results in both hypoxemia (and therefore decreased myocardial oxygen supply) and
augmented right ventricular afterload. Ischemic insults (i.e., myocardial ischemia or infarc-
tion), ethanol ingestion, or negative inotropic medications (e.g., large doses of B-blockers) can
all depress myocardial contractility and precipitate symptoms in the otherwise compensated
congestive heart failure patient.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The clinical manifestations of heart failure result from impaired forward cardiac output and/
or elevated venous pressures and relate to the ventricle that has failed (Table 9-4). A patient
may present with the chronic progressive symptoms of heart failure described here or, in cer-
tain cases, with sudden decompensation of left-sided heart function (e.g., acute pulmonary
edema, as described later in the chapter).
Symptoms
The most prominent manifestation of chronic left ventricular failure is dyspnea (breathless-
ness) on exertion. Controversy regarding the cause of this symptom has centered on whether
it results primarily from pulmonary venous congestion or from decreased forward cardiac
output. A pulmonary venous pressure that exceeds approximately 20 mm Hg leads to tran-
sudation of fuid into the pulmonary interstitium and congestion of the lung parenchyma.
The resulting reduced pulmonary compliance increases the work of breathing to move the
same volume of air. Moreover, the excess fuid in the interstitium compresses the walls of
the bronchioles and alveoli, increasing the resistance to airfow and requiring greater effort
Heart Failure 237
Symptoms Physical Findings
left sided

Dyspnea Diaphoresis (sweating)

Orthopnea Tachycardia, tachypnea

Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea Pulmonary rales

Fatigue Loud P,

S; gallop (in systolic dysfunction)
S, gallop (in diastolic dysfunction)
Right sided

Peripheral edema Jugular venous distention

Right upper quadrant discomfort Hepatomegaly

(because of hepatic enlargement) Peripheral edema
eee
of respiration. In addition, juxtacapillary receptors (J receptors) are stimulated and mediate
rapid shallow breathing. The heart failure patient can also suffer from dyspnea even in the
absence of pulmonary congestion, because reduced blood flow to overworked respiratory
muscles and accumulation of lactic acid may also contribute to that sensation. Heart failure
may initially cause dyspnea only on exertion, but more severe dysfunction results in symp-
toms at rest as well.

Other manifestations of low forward output in heart failure may include dulled mental sta-
tus because of reduced cerebral perfusion and impaired urine output during the day because
of decreased renal perfusion. The latter often gives way to increased urinary frequency at
night (nocturia) when, while supine, blood flow is redistributed to the kidney, promoting
renal perfusion and diuresis. Reduced skeletal muscle perfusion may result in fatigue and
weakness.

Other congestive manifestations of heart failure include orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea (PND), and nocturnal cough. Orthopnea is the sensation of labored breathing while
lying flat and is relieved by sitting upright. It results from the redistribution of intravascular
blood from the gravity-dependent portions of the body (abdomen and lower extremities)
toward the lungs after lying down. The degree of orthopnea is generally assessed by the num-
ber of pillows on which the patient sleeps to avoid breathlessness. Sometimes, orthopnea is
so signif cant that the patient may try to sleep upright in a chair.

PND is severe breathlessness that awakens the patient from sleep 2 to 3 hours after
retiring to bed. This frightening symptom results from the gradual reabsorption into the
circulation of lower extremity interstitial edema after lying down, with subsequent expan-
sion of intravascular volume and increased venous return to the heart and lungs. A noctur-
nal cough is another symptom of pulmonary congestion and is produced by a mechanism
similar to orthopnea. Hemoptysis (coughing up blood) may result from rupture of engorged
bronchial veins.

In right-sided heart failure, the elevated systemic venous pressures can result in abdominal
discomfort because the liver becomes engorged and its capsule stretched. Similarly, anorexia
(decreased appetite) and nausea may result from edema within the gastrointestinal tract.
Peripheral edema, especially in the ankles and feet, also reflects increased hydrostatic venous
pressures. Because of the effects of gravity, it tends to worsen while the patient is upright
during the day and is often improved by morning after lying supine at night. Even before
peripheral edema develops, the patient may note an unexpected weight gain resulting from
the accumulation of interstitial fluid.
238 chapter 9
Cass Def nition
I No limitation of physical activity
II Slight limitation of activity. Dyspnea and fatigue with moderate exertion
(e.g., walking up stairs quickly)
Ill Marked limitation of activity. Dyspnea with minimal exertion (e.g., slowly walking
up stairs)
IV Severe limitation of activity. Symptoms are present even at rest.
a
The symptoms of heart failure are commonly graded according to the New York Heart
Association (NYHA) classif cation (Table 9-5), and patients may shift from one class to
another, in either direction, over time. A newer system classif es patients according to their
stage in the temporal course of heart failure (Table 9-6). In this system, progression is in only
one direction, from Stage A to Stage D, reflecting the typical sequence of heart failure mani-
festations in clinical practice.
Physical Signs
The physical signs of heart failure depend on the severity and chronicity of the condition
and can be divided into those associated with left or right heart dysfunction (see Table 9-4).
Patients with only mild impairment may appear well. However, a patient with severe chronic
heart failure may demonstrate cachexia (a frail, wasted appearance) owing in part to poor
appetite and to the metabolic demands of the increased effort in breathing. In decompensated
left-sided heart failure, the patient may appear dusky (decreased cardiac output) and diapho-
retic (sweating because of increased sympathetic nervous activity), and the extremities are
cool because of peripheral arterial vasoconstriction. Tachypnea (rapid breathing) is common.
The pattern of Cheyne—Stokes respiration may also be present in advanced heart failure,
characterized by periods of hyperventilation separated by intervals of apnea (absent breath-
ing). This pattern is related to the prolonged circulation time between the lungs and respira-
tory center of the brain in heart failure that interferes with the normal feedback mechanism
Stage Description
A The patient is at risk of developing heart failure but has not yet developed structural
cardiac dysfunction (e.g., patient with coronary artery disease, hypertension, or
family history of cardiomyopathy).
B The patient with structural heart disease associated with heart failure but has not
yet developed symptoms
C The patient with current or prior symptoms of heart failure associated with structural
heart disease
D The patient with structural heart disease and refractory heart failure symptoms
despite maximal medical therapy who requires advanced interventions (e.g.,
cardiac transplantation)
a
Derived from Yancy C Jessup M Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCH AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure:
Executive Summary A Report of the American Gllege of Gardiology Foundation/ American heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines. Grculation. 2013;128:1810—-1852.
Heart Failure 239
of systemic oxygenation. Sinus tachycardia (resulting from increased sympathetic nervous
system activity) is also common. Pulsus alternans (alternating strong and weak contractions
detected in the peripheral pulse) may be present as a sign of advanced ventricular dysfunction.

In left-sided heart failure, the auscultatory fnding of pulmonary rales (“crackles”) is cre-
ated by the “popping open” of small airways during inspiration that had been closed off by
edema fluid. This f nding is initially apparent at the lung bases, where hydrostatic forces
are greatest; however, more severe pulmonary congestion is associated with additional rales
higher in the lung felds. Compression of conduction airways by pulmonary congestion may
produce coarse rhonchi and wheezing; the latter fnding in heart failure is termed cardiac
asthma.

Depending on the cause of heart failure, palpation of the heart may show that the left ven-
tricular impulse is not focal but diffuse (in dilated cardiomyopathy), sustained (in pressure
overload states such as aortic stenosis or hypertension), or lifting in quality (in volume over-
load states such as mitral regurgitation). Because elevated left heart fling pressures result in
increased pulmonary vascular pressures, the pulmonic component of the second heart sound
is often louder than normal. An early diastolic sound (S;) is frequently heard in adults with
systolic heart failure and is caused by abnormal f lling of the dilated chamber (see Chapter 2).
A late diastolic sound (S,) results from forceful atrial contraction into a stiffened ventricle and
is common in states of decreased LV compliance (diastolic dysfunction). The murmur of mitral
regurgitation is sometimes auscultated in left-sided heart failure if LV dilatation has stretched
the valve annulus and spread the papillary muscles apart from one another, thus preventing
proper closure of the mitral leaflets in systole.

In right-sided heart failure, different physical fndings may be present. Cardiac examina-
tion may reveal a palpable parasternal right ventricular heave, representing RV enlargement,
or a right-sided S; or S, gallop. The murmur of tricuspid regurgitation may be auscultated and
is due to right ventricular enlargement, analogous to mitral regurgitation that develops in
patients with LV dilatation. The elevated systemic venous pressure produced by right heart
failure is manifested by distention of the jugular veins as well as hepatic enlargement with
abdominal right upper quadrant tenderness. Edema accumulates in the dependent portions of
the body, beginning in the ankles and feet of ambulatory patients and in the presacral regions
of those who are bedridden.

Pleural effusions may develop in either left- or right-sided heart failure, because the pleu-
ral veins drain into both the systemic and pulmonary venous beds. The presence of pleural
effusions is suggested on physical examination by dullness to percussion over the posterior
lung bases.

Diagnostic Studies

A normal mean left atrial (LA) pressure is <10 mm Hg (see Fig. 3-13). If the LA pressure
exceeds approximately 15 mm Hg, the chest radiograph shows upper-zone vascular redis-
tribution, such that the vessels supplying the upper lobes of the lung are larger than those
supplying the lower lobes (see Fig. 3-5). This is explained as follows: when a patient is in the
upright position, blood flow is normally greater to the lung bases than to the apices because
of the effect of gravity. Redistribution of flow occurs with the development of interstitial and
perivascular edema, because such edema is most prominent at the lung bases (where the
hydrostatic pressure is the highest), such that the blood vessels in the bases are compressed,
whereas flow into the upper lung zones is less affected.

When the LA pressure surpasses 20 mm Hg, interstitial edema is usually manifested on
the chest radiograph as indistinctness of the vessels and the presence of Kerley B lines (short
linear markings at the periphery of the lower lung felds indicating interlobular edema—
see Fig. 3-5C). If the LA pressure exceeds 25 to 30 mm Hg, alveolar pulmonary edema may
develop, with opacif cation of the air spaces. The relationship between LA pressure and chest
240 chapter 9

radiograph f ndings is modif ed in patients with chronic heart failure because of enhanced lym-

phatic drainage, such that higher pressures can be accommodated with fewer radiologic signs.

Depending on the cause of heart failure, the chest radiograph may show cardiomegaly, def ned
as a cardiothoracic ratio greater than 0.5 on the posteroanterior image. A high right atrial pres-
sure also causes enlargement of the azygous vein silhouette. Pleural effusions may be present.

Assays for BNP, described earlier in the chapter, correlate well with the degree of LV dys-
function and prognosis. Furthermore, an elevated serum level of BNP can help distinguish
heart failure from other causes of dyspnea, such as pulmonary parenchymal diseases.

The cause of heart failure is often evident from the history, such as a patient who has
sustained a large myocardial infarction, or by physical examination, as in a patient with a
murmur of valvular heart disease. When the cause is not clear from clinical evaluation, the
frst step is to determine whether systolic ventricular function is normal or depressed (see
Fig. 9-6). Of the several noninvasive tests that can help make this determination, echocardiog-
raphy is especially useful and readily available.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of heart failure is dismal in the absence of a correctable underlying cause. The

5-year mortality rate following the diagnosis ranges between 45% and 60%, with men hav-

ing worse outcomes than women. Patients with severe symptoms (i.e., NYHA class III or IV)

fare the least well, having a l-year survival rate of only 40%. The greatest mortality is due

to refractory heart failure, but many patients die suddenly, presumably because of associated
ventricular arrhythmias. Heart failure patients with preserved EF have similar rates of hospi-
talization, in-hospital complications, and mortality as those with reduced EF.

Ventricular dysfunction usually begins with an inciting insult, but is a progressive process,
contributed to by the maladaptive activation of neurohormones, cytokines, and continuous
ventricular remodeling. Thus, it should not be surprising that measures of neurohormonal
and cytokine stimulation predict survival in heart failure patients. For example, adverse prog-
nosis correlates with the serum norepinephrine level (marker of sympathetic nervous system
activity), serum sodium (reduced level reflects activation of renin—angiotensin—aldosterone
system and alterations in intrarenal hemodynamics), endothelin-1, BNP, and TNF levels.

Despite the generally bleak prognosis, a heart failure patient’s outlook can be substantially
improved by specif c interventions, as discussed in the following sections.

TREATMENT OF HEART FAILURE WITH REDUCED EJECTION FRACTION

There are f ve main goals of therapy in patients with chronic heart failure and a reduced EF:

1. Identif cation and correction of the underlying condition causing heart failure. In some
patients, this may require surgical repair or replacement of dysfunctional cardiac valves,
coronary artery revascularization, aggressive treatment of hypertension, or cessation of
alcohol consumption.

2. Elimination of the acute precipitating cause of symptoms in a patient with heart failure who
was previously in a compensated state. This may include, for example, treating acute infections
or arrhythmias, removing sources of excessive salt intake, or eliminating drugs that can aggra-
vate symptomatology (e.g., certain calctum channel blockers, which have a negative inotropic
effect, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which can contribute to volume retention).

3. Management of heart failure symptoms:

a. Treatment of pulmonary and systemic vascular congestion. This is most readily accom-

plished by dietary sodium restriction and diuretic medications.

b. Measures to increase forward cardiac output and perfusion of vital organs through the

use of vasodilators and positive inotropic drugs.
Heart Failure 241

4. Modulation of the neurohormonal response to prevent adverse ventricular remodeling in

order to slow the progression of LV dysfunction.
5. Prolon gation of long-term survival. There is strong evidence from clinical trials that longev-

ity is enhanced by specif c therapies, as described below.

Diuretics

The mechanisms of action of diuretic drugs are summarized in Chapter 17. By promoting the
elimination of sodium and water through the kidney, diuretics reduce intravascular volume
and thus venous return to the heart. As a result, the preload of the left ventricle is decreased,
and its diastolic pressure falls out of the range that promotes pulmonary congestion (Fig. 9-10,
point b). The intent is to reduce the EDP (and therefore hydrostatic forces contributing to pul-
monary congestion) without a signif cant fall in stroke volume. The judicious use of diuret-
ics does not signif cantly reduce stroke volume and cardiac output in this setting, because
the failing ventricle is operating on the “flat” portion of a depressed Frank-Starling curve.
However, overly vigorous diuresis can lower LV fIling pressures into the steep portion of the
ventricular performance curve, resulting in an undesired fall in cardiac output (see Fig. 9-10,
point b’). Thus, diuretics should be used only if there is evidence of pulmonary congestion
(rales) or peripheral interstitial fluid accumulation (edema).

Agents that act primarily at the renal loop of Henle (e.g., furosemide, torsemide,
and bumetanide) are the most potent diuretics in heart failure. Thiazide diuretics (e.g.,

Normal
e
ec
Li
b Heart failure
b’ a
Pulmonary congestion
—_—_SSSSSSSSSS—*=8
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure
(or end-diastolic volume)

HGURE9-10. The effect of treatment on the left ventricular (LV) Frank—Starling curve in patients who
have heart failure with reduced EK Point a represents the failing heart on a curve that is shifted downward
compared with normal. The stroke volume is reduced (with blood pressure bordering on hypotension), and the
LVend-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) is increased, resulting in symptoms of pulmonary congestion. Therapy with
a diuretic or pure venous vasodilator (point b on the same Frank—Starling curve) reduces LVpressure without
much change in stroke volume (SV). However, excessive diuresis or venous vasodilatation may result in an
undesired fall in SVwith hypotension (point b’). Inotropic drug therapy (point c) and arteriolar (or “balanced”)
vasodilator therapy (point d) augment SV and because of improved LVemptying during contraction, the LVEDP
lessens. Point e represents the potential added beneft of combining an inotrope and vasodilator together.
The middle curve shows one example of how the Frank—Starling relationship shifts upward during inotropic/
vasodilator therapy but does not achieve the level of a normal ventricle.
242 (chapter 9
hydrochlorothiazide and metolazone) are also useful but are less effective in the setting of
decreased renal perfusion, which is often present in this condition.

The potential adverse effects of diuretics are described in Chapter 17. The most important
in heart failure patients include overly vigorous diuresis resulting in a fall in cardiac output
and electrolyte disturbances (particularly hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia), which may
contribute to arrhythmias. In patients with acute heart failure exacerbations, diuretics should
be administered intravenously (either by bolus injections or continuous infusion) because
venous congestion can limit the absorption of oral diuretics from the gut.

Vasodilators

One of the most important cardiac advances in the late twentieth century was the intro-
duction of vasodilator therapy for the treatment of heart failure, particularly ACE inhibitors.
As indicated earlier, neurohormonal compensatory mechanisms in heart failure often lead
to excessive vasoconstriction, volume retention, and ventricular remodeling, with pro-
gressive deterioration of cardiac function. Vasodilator drugs help to reverse these adverse
consequences. Moreover, multiple studies have shown that certain vasodilator regimens sig-
nif cantly extend survival in patients with heart failure. The pharmacology of these drugs is
described in Chapter 17.

Venous vasodilators (e.g., nitrates) increase venous capacitance and thereby decrease
venous return to the heart and left ventricular preload. Consequently, LV diastolic pressures
fall and the pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure declines, similar to the hemodynamic
effects of diuretic therapy. As a result, pulmonary congestion improves, and as long as the
heart failure patient is on the relatively “flat” part of the depressed Frank—Starling curve (see
Fig. 9-10), the cardiac output does not fall despite the reduction in ventricular f lling pres-
sure. However, venous vasodilatation in a patient who is operating on the steeper part of the
curve may result in an undesired fall in stroke volume, cardiac output, and blood pressure.

Pure arteriolar vasodilators (e.g., hydralazine) reduce systemic vascular resistance and
therefore LV afterload, which in turn permits increased ventricular muscle f ber shortening
during systole (see Fig. 9-5B). This results in an augmented stroke volume and is represented
on the Frank—Starling diagram as a shift in an upward direction (see Fig. 9-10, point d).
Although an arterial vasodilator might be expected to reduce blood pressure—an undesired
effect in patients with heart failure who may already be hypotensive—this generally does
not happen. As resistance is reduced by arteriolar vasodilatation, a concurrent rise in cardiac
output usually occurs, such that blood pressure remains constant or decreases only mildly.

Some groups of drugs result in vasodilatation of both the venous and arteriolar circuits
(“balanced” vasodilators). Of these, the most important are agents that inhibit the renin—
angiotensin—aldosterone system. ACE inhibitors (described in Chapters 13 and 17) interrupt
the production of AII, thereby modulating the vasoconstriction incited by that hormone in heart
failure patients. In addition, because aldosterone levels fall in response to ACE inhibitor therapy,
sodium elimination is facilitated, resulting in reduced intravascular volume and improvement of
systemic and pulmonary vascular congestion. ACE inhibitors also augment circulating levels of
bradykinin (see Chapter 17), which is thought to contribute to benef cial vasodilatation in heart
failure. As a result of these effects, ACE inhibitors limit maladaptive ventricular remodeling in
patients with chronic heart failure and following acute myocardial infarction (see Chapter 7).

Supporting the benef cial hemodynamic and neurohormonal blocking effects of ACE inhib-
itors, many large clinical trials have shown that these drugs reduce heart failure symptoms,
reduce the need for hospitalization, and most importantly, extend survival in patients with
heart failure with reduced EF. Thus, ACE inhibitors are standard f rst-line chronic therapy for
patients with LV systolic dysfunction.

The renin—angiotensin—aldosterone system can also be therapeutically inhibited by angio-
tensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), as described in Chapters 13 and 17. Since AII can be
Heart Failure 243
formed by pathways other than ACE, ARBs provide a more complete inhibition of the system
than ACE inhibitors, through blockade of the actual AII receptor (see Fig. 17.6). Conversely,
ARBs do not cause the potentially benef cial rise in serum bradykinin. The net result is that the
hemodynamic effects and mortality benef t of ARBs in heart failure are similar to those of ACE
inhibitors. Thus, they are prescribed to heart failure patients mainly when ACE inhibitors are
not tolerated (e.g., because of bradykinin-mediated side effects such as cough or angioedema).

Chronic therapy using the combination of the venous dilator isosorbide dinitrate plus the
arteriolar dilator hydralazine has also been shown to improve survival in patients with moder-
ate symptoms of heart failure. However, when the ACE inhibitor enalapril was compared with
the hydralazine—isosorbide dinitrate (H-ISDN) combination, the ACE inhibitor was shown to
produce the greater improvement in survival. Thus, H-ISDN is generally substituted when a
patient cannot tolerate ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy (e.g., because of renal insuff ciency or
hyperkalemia). Of note, the African American Heart Failure trial demonstrated that the addition
of H-ISDN to standard heart failure therapy (including a diuretic, B-blocker, and ACE inhibitor
or ARB) in black patients with heart failure further improved functional status and survival.

Nesiritide (human recombinant BNP) is an intravenous vasodilator drug available for
hospitalized patients with decompensated heart failure. It causes rapid and potent vasodilata-
tion, reduces elevated intracardiac pressures, and augments forward cardiac output. However,
it is an expensive drug that does not improve outcomes and may worsen renal function, so
its use should be restricted to patients who have not responded to, or cannot tolerate, other
intravenous vasodilators, such as intravenous nitroglycerin or nitroprusside (see Chapter 17).

Positive Inotropic Drugs
Inotropic drugs include B-adrenergic agonists, digitalis glycosides, and phosphodiesterase type 3
inhibitors (see Chapter 17). By increasing the availability of intracellular calctum, each of these
drug groups enhances the force of ventricular contraction and therefore shifts the Frank—Starling
curve in an upward direction (see Fig. 9-10). As a result, stroke volume and cardiac output are
augmented at any given ventricular EDV. Therefore, these agents may be useful in treating
patients with systolic dysfunction, but typically not those with heart failure with preserved EF.
p-Adrenergic agonists (e.g., dobutamine and dopamine) are administered intravenously
for temporary hemodynamic support in acutely ill, hospitalized patients. Their long-term
use is limited by the lack of an oral form of administration and by the development of drug
tolerance. The latter refers to the progressive decline in effectiveness during continued admin-
istration of the drug, possibly owing to down-regulation of myocardial adrenergic receptors.
Likewise, the role of phosphodiesterase 3 inhibitors (e.g., milrinone) is limited to the intra-
venous treatment of congestive heart failure in acutely ill patients. Despite the initial promise
of effective oral phosphodiesterase 3 inhibitors, studies thus far actually demonstrate reduced
survival among patients receiving this form of treatment.

One of the oldest forms of inotropic therapy is digitalis (see Chapter 17), which can be
administered intravenously or orally. Digitalis preparations enhance contractility, reduce car-
diac enlargement, improve symptoms, and augment cardiac output in patients with systolic
heart failure. Digitalis also increases the sensitivity of the baroreceptors, so that the compen-
satory sympathetic drive in heart failure is blunted, a desired effect that reduces left ventricu-
lar afterload. By slowing AV nodal conduction and thereby reducing the rate of ventricular
contractions, digitalis has an added benef t in patients with congestive heart failure who have
concurrent atrial f brillation. Although digitalis can improve symptomatology and reduce the
rate of hospitalizations in heart failure patients, it has not been shown to improve long-term
survival. Thus, its use is limited to patients who remain symptomatic despite other standard
therapies or to help slow the ventricular rate if atrial f brillation is also present. Digitalis is
not useful in the treatment of heart failure with preserved EF because it does not improve
ventricular relaxation properties.
244 (chapter 9

B-Blockers
Historically, B-blockers were thought to be contraindicated in patients with systolic dysfunc-
tion because their negative inotropic effect would be expected to worsen symptomatology.
However, clinical trials have actually shown that long-term B-blocker therapy has important
benef ts in patients with stable chronic heart failure with reduced EF, including augmented
cardiac output, reduced hemodynamic deterioration, the need for fewer hospitalizations, and
improved survival. The explanation for these desired effects remains conjectural but may
relate to the drugs’ effects on reducing heart rate and blunting chronic sympathetic activation
or to their anti-ischemic properties.

The three B-blockers that have been shown to be benef cial in randomized clinical trials of
heart failure include carvedilol (a nonselective B-blocker with weak a-blocking properties—
see Chapter 17) and the B,-selective agents metoprolol succinate and bisoprolol. These drugs
are well tolerated in stable patients (i.e., those without recent deterioration of heart failure
symptoms or active volume overload). Nonetheless, B-blockers should always be used cau-
tiously in heart failure to prevent acute deterioration related to their negative inotropic effect.
Regimens should be started at low dosage and augmented gradually.

Aldosterone Antagonist Therapy

There is evidence that chronic excess of aldosterone in heart failure contributes to cardiac
fbrosis and adverse ventricular remodeling. Antagonists of this hormone (which have been
used historically as mild diuretics—see Chapter 17) have shown clinical beneft in heart
failure patients. For example, in a clinical trial of patients with advanced heart failure (1.e.,
NYHA Class III to IV) who were already taking an ACE inhibitor and diuretics, the aldoste-
rone receptor antagonist spironolactone substantially reduced mortality rates and improved
heart failure symptoms. Eplerenone, a more specif c aldosterone receptor inhibitor, has been
shown to improve survival of patients with congestive heart failure after acute myocardial
infarction (see Chapter 7) as well as patients with more mild forms of chronic heart failure
(i.e., NYHA Class II to II). Although aldosterone antagonists have been well tolerated in care-
fully controlled studies, the serum potassium level must be monitored to prevent hyperkale-
mia, especially if there is renal impairment or concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.

In summary, standard therapy of chronic heart failure with reduced EF should include
several drugs, the cornerstones of which are an ACE inhibitor and a B-blocker. An accepted
sequence of therapy is to start with an ACE inhibitor as well as a diuretic if pulmonary or
systemic congestive symptoms are present. If the patient is unable to tolerate the ACE inhibi-
tor, then an ARB (or hydralazine plus isosorbide dinitrate) may be substituted. For patients
without recent clinical deterioration or volume overload, a B-blocker should be added. Those
with persistent symptomatic heart failure may beneft from the addition of an aldosterone
antagonist. For refractory symptoms, digoxin can be prescribed for its hemodynamic benef t.

Additional Therapies

Arrhythmia Management
Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias frequently accompany chronic heart failure. For exam-
ple, atrial f brillation is very common in this setting and conversion back to sinus rhythm
(see Chapter 11) can substantially improve cardiac output. Ventricular arrhythmias are
also frequent in heart failure and may lead to sudden death. The antiarrhythmic drug that
is most effective at suppressing arrhythmias and least likely to provoke other dangerous
rhythm disorders in heart failure patients is amiodarone. However, studies of amiodarone
Heart Failure 245
for the treatment of asymptomatic ventricular arrhythmias in heart failure have not shown
a consistent survival benef t. In addition, heart failure patients with symptomatic or sus-
tained ventricular arrhythmias, or those with inducible ventricular tachycardia during
electrophysiologic testing, beneft more from the insertion of an implantable cardioverter—
def brillator (ICD; see Chapter 11). Based on the results of large-scale randomized trials,
ICD implantation is indicated for many patients with heart failure and at least moder-
ately reduced systolic function (e.g., LVEF <35%), regardless of the presence of ventricular
arrhythmias, because this approach reduces the likelihood of sudden cardiac death in this
population.

Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy
Intraventricular conduction abnormalities with widened QRS complexes (especially left bun-
dle branch block) are common in patients with advanced heart failure. Such abnormalities
can actually contribute to cardiac symptoms because of the resultant uncoordinated pattern
of right and left ventricular contraction. Advanced pacemakers have been developed that
stimulate both ventricles simultaneously, thus resynchronizing the contractile effort. This
technique of biventricular pacing, also termed cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT), has
been shown to augment left ventricular systolic function, improve exercise capacity, and
reduce the frequency of heart failure exacerbations and mortality. Thus, CRT is appropriate
for selected patients with advanced systolic dysfunction (LV EF <35%), a prolonged QRS
duration (> 120 ms) and continued symptoms of heart failure despite appropriate pharma-
cologic therapies. Since patients who receive CRT are typically also candidates for an ICD,
modern devices combine both functions in a single, small implantable unit.

Cardiac Mechanical Greulatory Support and Replacement Therapy
A patient with severe LV dysfunction whose condition remains refractory to maximal medical
management may be a candidate for cardiac transplantation. However, only approximately
4,000 transplants are performed worldwide each year because of a shortage of donor hearts,
many fewer than the number of patients with refractory heart failure symptoms. For certain
patients who are too ill to wait for a heart donor, or who are not eligible for a transplant,
alternative mechanical therapies are in selected use. Ventricular assist devices (VADs) and
implantable total artif cial hearts can be used to support cardiac pump function in such
patients. Recent technological advances in continuous-flow left-sided VADs have resulted in
l-year survival rates greater than 70%, compared to less than 25% survival rates in similar
groups of advanced heart failure patients treated with medical therapy alone.

TREATMENT OF HEART FAILURE WITH PRESERVED EJECTION FRACTION
The goals of therapy in heart failure with preserved EF include (1) the relief of pulmonary and
systemic congestion and (2) addressing correctable causes of the impaired diastolic function
(e.g., hypertension, coronary artery disease). Diuretics reduce pulmonary congestion and
peripheral edema but must be used cautiously to avoid under f lling of the left ventricle. A
stiffened left ventricle relies on higher-than-normal pressures to achieve adequate diastolic
f lling (see Fig. 9-7B), and excessive diuresis could reduce f Iling and therefore impair stroke
volume and cardiac output (see Fig. 9-10, point b’).

Unlike patients with impaired systolic function, B-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs
have no demonstrated mortality beneft in patients with heart failure with preserved EF.
The aldosterone antagonist spironolactone was recently shown to reduce the frequency of
hospitalizations for heart failure in this population, but did not improve the survival rate. Since
contractile function is preserved, inotropic drugs have no therapeutic role in this syndrome.
246 Chapter

ACUTE HEART FAILURE
In contrast to the f ndings of chronic heart failure described to this point, patients with acute
heart failure are those who present with urgent and often life-threatening symptomatology.
Acute heart failure may develop in a previously asymptomatic patient (e.g., resulting from an
acute coronary syndrome [Chapter 7], severe hypertension [Chapter 13], or acute valvular
regurgitation [Chapter 8]), or it may complicate chronic compensated heart failure following
a precipitating trigger (see Table 9-3). Management of acute heart failure typically requires
hospitalization and prompt interventions.

The classif cation of patients with acute heart failure, and the approach to therapy, can be
tailored based on the presence or absence of two major fndings at the bedside: (1) volume
overload (i.e., “wet” vs. “dry”) as a reflection of elevated LV fling pressures and (2) signs
of decreased cardiac output with reduced tissue perfusion (“cold” vs. “warm” extremities).
Examples of a “wet” prof le, indicative of volume overload, include pulmonary rales, jugular
venous distension, and edema of the lower extremities. Figure 9-11 shows how patients with
acute heart failure can be divided into four prof les based on observations of these parameters.

Prof le A indicates normal hemodynamics. Cardiopulmonary symptoms in such patients
would be due to factors other than heart failure, such as parenchymal lung disease or tran-
sient myocardial ischemia. Prof les B and C are typical of patients with acute pulmonary
edema (described below). Those with Prof le B have “wet” lungs but preserved (“warm’”’) tis-
sue perfusion. Profle C is more serious; in addition to congestive f ndings, impaired forward
cardiac output results in marked systemic vasoconstriction (e.g., activation of the sympathetic
nervous system) and therefore “cold” extremities. Patients with Profle C have a prognosis
worse than those with Prof le B, who in turn have poorer outcomes than those with Prof le A.

Patients with Profle L do not represent an extension of this continuum. Rather, they dis-
play “cold” extremities due to low output (hence the label “L”) but no signs of vascular con-
gestion. This prof le may arise in patients who are actually volume deplete, or those with very
limited cardiac reserve in the absence of volume overload (e.g., a patient with a dilated left
ventricle and mitral regurgitation who becomes short of breath with activity because of the
inability to generate adequate forward cardiac output). These profles of acute heart failure
should not be confused with the classif cation of chronic heart failure (Stages A through D)
presented in Table 9-6.

The goals of therapy in acute heart failure are to (1) normalize ventricular f lling pressures
and (2) restore adequate tissue perfusion. Identif cation of the patient’s prof le type guides
therapeutic interventions. For example, a
patient with Prof le B would require diuretic TLV filling Pressures
and/or vasodilator therapy for pulmonary (Pulmonary and/or Systemic Congestion)
edema (described in the next section),
and those with Profle C may additionally ff} Nw | ves)
require intravenous inotropic medications
to strengthen cardiac output. Patients with No Profile A Profile B
Profle L may require volume expansion. “Warm and Dry” | “Warm and Wet”
The presence of profle A would prompt
a search for contributions to the patient’s
symptoms other than heart failure.

“Cold and Dry” “Cold and Wet”
Acute Pulmonary Edema
. . HGURE 9-11. Hemodynamic prof les in acute heart
A common manifestation of acute left- failure. (Derived from Nohria A, Tang SW Fang JC
sided heart failure (e.g., typical of Prof les et al. Clinical assessment identif es hemodynamic
B and C) is cardiogenic pulmonary edema, _ profles that predict outcomes in patients admitted with
in which elevated capillary hydrostatic heart failure. J Am @ll Cardiol. 2003;41:1797-1804.)
Heart Failure 247
pressure causes rapid accumulation of fluid within the interstitium and alveolar spaces of
the lung. In the presence of normal plasma oncotic pressure, pulmonary edema develops
when the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, which reflects LV diastolic pressure, exceeds
approximately 25 mm Hg.

This condition is frequently accompanied by hypoxemia because of shunting of pulmonary
blood flow through regions of hypoventilated alveoli. Like other manifestations of acute heart
failure, pulmonary edema may appear suddenly in a previously asymptomatic person (e.g.,
in the setting of an acute myocardial infarction) or in a patient with chronic compensated
congestive heart failure following a precipitating event (see Table 9-3). Pulmonary edema is a
horrifying experience for the patient, resulting in severe dyspnea and anxiety while struggling
to breathe.

On examination, the patient is tachycardic and may demonstrate cold, clammy skin owing
to peripheral vasoconstriction in response to increased sympathetic outflow (i.e., Profle C).
Tachypnea and coughing of “frothy” sputum represent transudation of fluid into the alveoli.
Rales are present initially at the bases and later throughout the lung f elds, sometimes accom-
panied by wheezing because of edema within the conductance airways.

Pulmonary edema is a life-threatening emergency that requires immediate improvement of
systemic oxygenation and elimination of the underlying cause. The patient should be seated
upright to permit pooling of blood within the systemic veins of the lower body, thereby reducing
venous return to the heart. Supplemental oxygen is provided by a face mask. Morphine sulfate
is administered intravenously to reduce anxiety and also acts as a venous dilator to facilitate
pooling of blood peripherally. A rapidly acting diuretic, such as intravenous furosemide, is
administered to further reduce LV preload and pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure. Other
means of reducing preload include administration of nitrates (often intravenously). Intravenous
inotropic drugs (e.g., dopamine) may increase forward CO and are used primarily in patients
with Prof le C. During resolution of the pulmonary congestion and hypoxemia, attention should
be directed at identifying and treating the underlying precipitating cause.

An easy-to-remember mnemonic for the principal components of management of pulmo-
nary edema is the alphabetic sequence LMNOP:

Lasix (trade name for furosemide)

Morphine

Nitrates

Oxygen

Position (sit upright)

SUMMARY

e Ventricular stroke volume (SV) is a function of preload, afterload, and contractility;

SV rises when there is an increase in preload, a decrease in afterload, or augmented

contractility.

° Cardiac output = heart rate x stroke volume.

° Ventricular EDV (or EDP) represents preload and is influenced by the chamber’s compliance.

e Ventricular ESV depends on the afterload and contractility but not on the preload.

e Heart failure is a clinical syndrome in which cardiac output (CO) fails to meet the metabolic
demands of the body or meets those demands only if cardiac f lling pressures are abnormally
high.

° Chronic heart failure may be classif ed into two categories: (1) heart failure with reduced EF
owing to impaired left ventricular systolic function and (2) heart failure with preserved EF
(e.g., diastolic dysfunction).

* Compensatory mechanisms in heart failure that initially maintain circulatory function
include (1) preload augmentation with increased stroke volume via the Frank—Starling
248 Chapter 9
mechanism, (2) activation of neurohormonal systems, and (3) ventricular hypertrophy; how-
ever, these compensations eventually become maladaptive, contributing to adverse ventricu-
lar remodeling and progressive deterioration of ventricular function.

e Symptoms of heart failure may be exacerbated by precipitating factors that increase meta-
bolic demand (e.g., tachycardia), increase circulating volume, augment afterload, or decrease
contractility.

° Treatment of heart failure includes addressing the underlying cause of the condition, elimi-
nating precipitating factors, and modulating detrimental neurohormonal activations.

e Standard therapy of symptomatic heart failure with reduced EF includes an ACE inhibitor,
B-blocker, and sometimes an aldosterone antagonist; for patients who do not tolerate an
ACE inhibitor, an AII receptor blocker or the combination of hydralazine plus nitrates can be
substituted.

e Diuretics should be used to treat volume overload, and inotropic drugs are typically reserved
for acute “rescue” management of low CO states.

° For patients with heart failure with reduced EF who meet specif c criteria, an implantable
cardioverter—def brillator and/or cardiac resynchronization therapy (biventricular pacing)
may be indicated.

° For refractory end-stage heart failure, cardiac transplantation and/or mechanical circulatory
support should be considered in carefully selected patients.

° Therapy for heart failure with preserved EF relies primarily on diuretics to relieve pulmonary
congestion, but such therapy must be administered cautiously to avoid excess reduction of
preload and hypotension.

e Acute heart failure can be prof led by, and treatment decisions based on, the presence or
absence of (1) elevated left heart f Iling pressures (wet vs. dry) and (2) reduced systemic tis-
sue perfusion with elevated systemic vascular resistance (1.e., cold vs. warm).

Acknowledgments

Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Neal Anjan Chatterjee; Ravi V. Shah,

MD; George S. M. Dyer, MD; Stephen K. Frankel, MD; Arthur Coday Jr., MD; and Vikram

Janakiraman, MD.

Additional Reading

Braunwald E. Heart failure. JACC: Heart Failure. 201331: Stewart G, Givertz M. Mechanical circulatory support for
1-20. advanced heart failure: patients and technology in evolution.

Hsich EM, Pina IL. Heart failure in women. J Am Coll Cardiol. Circulation. 2012;125:1304—1315.
2009;54:491—498. Triposkiadis F, Karayannis G, Giamouzis G, et al. The sympa-

Maeder MT, Kaye DM. Heart failure with normal left ven- thetic nervous system in heart failure: physiology, patho-
tricular ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53: physiology, and clinical implications. J Am Coll Cardiol.
905-918. 2009;54:1747-1762.

Maron BA, Leopold JA. Aldosterone receptor antagonists: Yancy C, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/ AHA guideline
effective but often forgotten. Circulation. 2010;121: for the management of heart failure: executive summary a
934-939. report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/

McMurray JJV. Systolic heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2010;362: American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
228-238. Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:1810—1852.
ae
kd
The Gardiomyopathies Wf
P. Connor Johnson f (
G. William Dec Fy
Leonard S. Lilly
< .
/_
—
Chapter Outline C ardiomyopathies are a diverse set of heart muscle disor-
; / ders that cause mechanical and/or electrical dysfunction
Dilated Cantiomyopathy of the myocardium. Excluded from the def nition of this group
Friology : : : : :
Pathology of diseases is heart muscle impairment resulting from other
Pathophysiology specif c cardiovascular disorders such as hypertension, valvular
Ginical Hndings abnormalities, or congenital heart disease. Gardiomyopathies
Physical Examination often result in inappropriate ventricular hypertrophy or dilata-
Dagnostic studies tion, and progressive heart failure and cardiovascular death are
bie . common end manifestations. These conditions can involve the
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy .
Hiology heart alone or may be a component of a systemic syndrome.
Pathology Cardiomyopathies can be classifed into three main types
Pathophysiology based on the anatomic appearance and abnormal physiology
Cinical Findings of the left ventricle (LV) (Fig. 10-1). Dilated cardiomyopathy
i : | : : with impaired systolic contractile function; hypertrophic cardi-
eatmen ;
Prognosis omyopathy (HCW), by an abnormally thickened ventricular wall
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy with abnormal diastolic relaxation but usually intact systolic
Pathophysiology function; and restrictive cardiomyopathy, by an abnormally
Cinical Findings stiffened myocardium (because of fbrosis or an inf ltrative
Physical Examination process) leading to impaired diastolic relaxation, but systolic
DETAR MYT contractile function is typically normal or near normal.
Treatment
Other Forms of Cardiomyopathy
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
‘tiolog
