.
ioe
1a
Atherosclerosis
é
|.
Sarrah Shahawy \ a
Peter Libby
a
Chapter Outline A therosclerosis is the leading cause of mortality and
morbidity in developed nations. Through its major mani-
Vascular Biology of Atherosclerosis festations of myocardial infarction and stroke, it has also become
Normal Arterial Wall ; ,
Atherosclerotic Arterial Wall a major cause of death in the developing world. Gmmonly
Qmplications of Atherosclerosis known as “hardening of the arteries,” atherosclerosis derives
Atherosclerosis Risk Factors its name from the Geek roots athere-, meaning “gruel,” and
Genetics -skleros, meaning “hardness.” Recent evidence has demon-
Traditional RISK FaCtOrs strated that chronic inflammation drives the atherosclerotic
fom ers MNCL process and transduces traditional risk factors (such as hyper-
a cholesterolemia) into altered behavior of vascular wall cells,
contributing to the disease and its thrombotic complications.
The course of atherogenesis can smolder throughout adult-
hood, punctuated by acute cardiovascular events.
describes the normal arterial wall, the pathogenesis of ather-
osclerotic plaque formation, and the complications that lead
to clinical manifestations of the disease. The second section
describes fndings from population studies that have identi-
fed specifc risk factors for atherosclerotic events, thereby
offering opportunities for prevention and treatment.
VASCULAR BIOLOGY OF ATHEROSCLEROSIS
iii
Atherosclerosis 113
Internal elastic lamina Ea External elastic lamina
LAB a Re)
Cif FAN
Vy —_ SAK XS
Yj ey SN \
HiGURE 5-1. Schematic diagram i, Wy ~ \\
of the arterial wall. The intima, if If ( \ i} \ i .
the innermost layer, overlies the ! ¢ ( ' Lumen TW An Endothelial cells
muscular media demarcated by Adventitia mi i , y \
the internal elastic lamina. The ‘ AN y) I iy
external elastic lamina separates \\ \ ~ = y My ly i
the media from the outer layer, SY LOSS yi} Wy
the adventitia. (Modifed from YY Ws SSL yf
Lieberman M Marks’ Basic Medical \ SSS Sfp)
Biochemistry: A Clinical Approach. QS PRL
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Media Si ee eee Intima
Kluwer Health; 2013:649.) (Smooth muscle cells)
separate this middle layer from the intima and adventitia, respectively. The media consists of
smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and extracellular matrix and serves the contractile and elastic
functions of the vessel. The elastic component, more prominent in large arteries (e.g., the aorta
and its primary branches), stretches during the high pressure of systole and then recoils during
diastole, propelling blood forward. The muscular component, more prominent in smaller arter-
ies such as arterioles, constricts or relaxes to alter vessel resistance and therefore luminal blood
flow (flow = pressure/resistance; see Chapter 6). The adventitia contains nerves, lymphatics,
and blood vessels (vasa vasorum) that nourish the cells of the arterial wall.

Far from an inert conduit, the living arterial wall hosts dynamic interchanges between its
cellular components—most importantly, endothelial cells, vascular SMC, and their surround-
ing extracellular matrix. An understanding of the dysfunction that leads to atherosclerosis
requires knowledge of the normal function of these components.

Fndothelial Gils

In a healthy artery, the endothelium performs structural, metabolic, and signaling functions
that maintain homeostasis of the vessel wall. The tightly adjoined endothelial cells form a
barrier that contains blood within the lumen of the vessel and controls the passage of large
molecules from the circulation into the subendothelial space. As blood traverses the vascu-
lar tree, it encounters antithrombotic molecules produced by the normal endothelium that
prevent it from clotting or that promote fbrinolysis (the breakdown of fbrin clots). Some
of these molecules reside on the endothelial surface (e.g., heparan sulfate, thrombomodu-
lin, and plasminogen activators; see Chapter 7), while other antithrombotic products of the
endothelium enter the circulation (e.g., prostacyclin and nitric oxide [NO]; see Chapter 6).
Although a net anticoagulant state normally prevails, the endothelium can also produce pro-
thrombotic and antif brinolytic molecules when subjected to various stressors.

Furthermore, endothelial cells secrete substances that modulate contraction of SMC in the
underlying medial layer. These substances include vasodilators (e.g., NO and prostacyclin)
and vasoconstrictors (e.g., endothelin) that alter the arteriolar resistance and therefore lumi-
nal blood flow. In a normal artery, the predominance of vasodilator substances results in net
smooth muscle relaxation.

Endothelial cells can also modulate the immune response. In the absence of patho-
logic stimulation, healthy arterial endothelial cells resist leukocyte adhesion and thereby
oppose local inflammation. However, endothelial cells respond to local injury or infection
by expressing cell surface adhesion molecules, which attach mononuclear cells to the endo-
thelium, and chemokines—substances that facilitate leukocyte recruitment to the site of
114 (chapter 5
NORMAL ACTIVATED
ENDOTHELIAL re ;- - =
CELLS
¢ Impermeable to large molecules A Permeability
¢ Anti-inflammatory A Inflammatory cytokines
¢ Resist leukocyte adhesion ALeukocyte adhesion molecules
¢ Promote vasodilation V Vasodilatory molecules
* Resist thrombosis V Antithrombotic molecules
SMOOTH MUSCLE “ttl
CELLS
¢ Normal contractile function A Inflammatory cytokines
¢ Maintain extracellular matrix AExtracellular matrix synthesis
* Most contained in medial layer A Migration into intima and
prolife ration
HGURE5-2. Endothelial and smooth muscle cell activation by inf ammation. Normal endothelial and
SMC maintain the integrity and elasticity of the normal arterial wall while limiting immune cell inf Itration.
Inflammatory activation of these vascular cells corrupts their normal functions and favors proatherogenic
mechanisms that drive plaque development.
injury. These effects result in part by activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor
kappa B (NF«B.)

In summary, the normal endothelium provides a protective, nonthrombogenic surface with

homeostatic vasodilatory and anti-inflammatory properties (Fig. 5-2).
Vascular Smooth Muscle Gls

SMC within the medial layer of normal muscular arteries have both contractile and synthetic
capabilities. Various vasoactive substances modulate the contractile function, resulting in
vasoconstriction or vasodilation. Such agonists include circulating molecules (e.g., angioten-
sin II), those released from local nerve terminals (e.g., acetylcholine), and others originating
from the overlying endothelium (e.g., endothelin and NO). SMC also synthesize the collagen,
elastin, and proteoglycans that form the bulk of the vascular extracellular matrix (see Fig. 5-2).
In addition, SMC produce vasoactive and inflammatory mediators, including interleukin-6 (IL-
6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF).

In normal arteries, most SMC reside in the medial layer, although human arteries also
contain some SMC in the intima, particularly in sites predisposed to atherosclerosis. During
atherogenesis, medial SMC can migrate into the intima, proliferate, and augment synthesis of
extracellular matrix macromolecules while they dampen contractile protein content.

Extracellular Matrix

In healthy arteries, f brillar collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans make up most of the extracel-
lular matrix in the medial layer. Interstitial collagen f brils, constructed from intertwining heli-
cal proteins, possess great biomechanical strength, while elastin provides flexibility. Together
these components maintain the structural integrity of the vessel, despite the high pressure
within the lumen. The extracellular matrix also regulates the growth of its resident cells.
Native fbrillar collagen, in particular, can inhibit SMC proliferation in vitro. Furthermore,
the matrix influences cellular responses to stimuli—matrix-bound cells respond in a specif c
manner to growth factors and resist apoptosis (programmed cell death).
Atherosclerosis 115
Atherosclerotic Arterial Wall
The arterial wall is a dynamic and regulated structure, but certain stimuli can disturb normal
homeostasis and pave the way for atherogenesis. For example, as described later, vascular
endothelial cells, as well as SMC, react readily to inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1 and
TNE, and can produce them as well.

With the recognition that vascular wall cells respond to, and produce, proinflammatory
agents, investigations into the role of “activated” endothelial and SMC in atherogenesis bur-
geoned. As a consequence, vascular endothelium and SMC joined classical inflammatory
cells, such as mononuclear phagocytes and T lymphocytes, as key players in early atheroma
formation and in advanced plaque progression. This fundamental research has identif ed sev-
eral key components that contribute to the atherosclerotic inflammatory process, including
endothelial dysfunction, accumulation of lipids within the intima, recruitment of leukocytes
and SMC to the vessel wall, formation of foam cells, and deposition of extracellular matrix
(Fig. 5-3), as described in the following sections. Rather than follow a sequential path, the
cells of atherosclerotic lesions continuously interact and modify each other’s behavior, shap-
ing the plaque over decades into one of many possible prof les. This section categorizes these
mechanisms into three pathologic stages: the fatty streak, plaque progression, and plaque dis-
ruption (Fig. 5-4). In the arterial tree, lesions of all three stages can coexist, often side by side.

Fatty Streak
Fatty streaks represent the earliest visible lesions of atherosclerosis. On gross inspection, they
appear as areas of yellow discoloration on the artery’s inner surface, but they neither pro-
trude substantially into the arterial lumen nor impede blood flow. Surprisingly, fatty streaks
exist in the aorta and coronary arteries of most people by age 20. They do not cause symp-
toms, and in some locations in the vasculature, they may regress over time. Although the
precise initiation of fatty streak development is not known, observations in animals suggest
that various stressors cause early endothelial dysfunction, as described in the next section.
Foam cell = —
° @ Monocytes ZS Czy
e Macrophage pe ep) _- Cell apoptosis
PLDL® oy @ Ze © eae)
Vascular @ adhesion  o fe) BOY ge Smooth muscle
endothelium ——a molecule ae SS i 6 oe fe) W, ZA mitogens
Oxidized LDL Tei oRe "O°, Scavenger “6 Smooth muscle
Internal elastic aS et rs Pee le
: e oo u
FIGURE5-3. Schematic diagram of the evolution of atherosclerotic plaque. (1) Accumulation of lipoprotein particles in
the intima. The darker color depicts modif cation of the lipoproteins (e.g., by oxidation or glycation). (2) Oxidative stress,
including constituents of modifed LDL, induces local cytokine elaboration. (3) These cytokines promote increased expression
of adhesion molecules that bind leukocytes and of chemoattractant molecules (e.g., monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
[McCP-1]) that direct leukocyte migration into the intima. (4) After entering the artery wall in response to chemoattractants,
blood monocytes encounter stimuli such as macrophage colony-—stimulating factor (M-CSF) that augment their expression
of scavenger receptors. (5) Scavenger receptors mediate the uptake of modif ed lipoprotein particles and promote the
development of foam cells. Macrophage foam cells are a source of additional cytokines and effector molecules such as
superoxide anion (O, ) and matrix metalloproteinases. (6) SMC migrate into the intima from the media. Note the increasing
intimal thickness. (7) Intimal SMC divide and elaborate extracellular matrix, promoting matrix accumulation in the growing
atherosclerotic plaque. In this manner, the fatty streak evolves into a fbrofatty lesion. (8) In later stages, calcif cation can
occur (not depicted) and fbrosis continues, sometimes accompanied by smooth muscle cell death (including programmed cell
death or apoptosis), yielding a relatively acellular f brous capsule surrounding a lipid-rich core that may also contain dying
or dead cells. IL-1, interleukin 1; LDL low-density lipoprotein. (Mbdif ed from Mann DL Apes D, Lbby P, Bonow ROQeds.
Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Hsevier Saunders; 2015.)
116 Chapter 5
Ly)

a, Pen an <9 ize
eco A ee Se
ss e SS iS aS

FATTY STREAK PLAQUE PROGRESSION PLAQUE DISRUPTION
* Endothelial dys function * Smooth muscle cell migration * Disrupted plaque integrity
* Lipoprotein entry and * Altered matrix synthesis and *Thrombus formation

modification degradation

* Leukocyte recruitment * Lipid core formation

* Foam cell formation
A B Cc
HGURE5-4. Stages of plaque development. A. The fatty streak develops as a result of endothelial dysfunction,
lipoprotein entry and modif cation, leukocyte recruitment, and foam cell formation. B Plaque progression involves
migration of SMCinto the intima, where they divide and elaborate extracellular matrix. The f brous cap contains
a lipid core. C Hemodynamic stresses and degradation of extracellular matrix increase the susceptibility of the
fbrous cap to rupture, allowing superimposed thrombus formation. (Modif ed from Libby P, Ridker PM Maseri A.
Inflammation and atherosclerosis. Grculation. 2002;105:1136.)
Such dysfunction allows entry and modif cation of lipids within the subendothelial space,
where they serve as proinflammatory mediators that initiate leukocyte recruitment and foam
cell formation—the pathologic hallmarks of the fatty streak (Fig. 5-3).

Endothelial Dysfunction

Injury to the arterial endothelium represents a primary event in atherogenesis. Such injury
can result from exposure to diverse agents, including physical forces and chemical irritants.

The predisposition of certain regions of arteries (e.g., branch points) to develop athero-
mata supports the role of hydrodynamic stress. In straight sections of arteries, the normal
laminar (i.e., smooth) shear forces favor the endothelial production of NO, which is an
endogenous vasodilator, an inhibitor of platelet aggregation, and an anti-inflammatory sub-
stance (see Chapter 6). Moreover, laminar flow and high shear stress activates transcription
factors such as Krippel-like factor 2 (KLF2) that evokes an “atheroprotective” panel of
endothelial functions and accentuates expression of the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dis-
mutase, which protects against reactive oxygen species. Conversely, disturbed flow occurs
near arterial branch points, causing low shear stress, which impairs these locally athero-
protective endothelial functions. Accordingly, arteries with few branches (e.g., the internal
mammary artery) show relative resistance to atherosclerosis, whereas bifurcated vessels
(e.g., the common carotid and left coronary arteries) contain common sites for atheroma
formation.

Endothelial dysfunction may also result from exposure to a “toxic” chemical environment.
For example, tobacco smoking, abnormal circulating lipid levels, and diabetes—all known
risk factors for atherosclerosis—can promote endothelial dysfunction. Each of these stimuli
increases endothelial production of reactive oxygen species—notably, superoxide anion—that
interact with other intracellular molecules to influence the metabolic and synthetic functions
of the endothelium. In such an environment, the cells promote local inflammation.

When physical and chemical stressors interrupt normal endothelial homeostasis, an acti-
vated state ensues, manifested by impairment of the endothelium’s role as a permeability
barrier, the release of inflammatory cytokines, increased production of cell surface adhesion
molecules that recruit leukocytes, altered release of vasoactive substances (e.g., prostacyclin
and NO), and interference with normal antithrombotic properties. These undesired effects of
Atherosclerosis 117
dysfunctional endothelium lay the groundwork for subsequent events in the development of
atherosclerosis (see Figs. 5-2 and 5-3).

Lipoprotein Entry and Modif cation

The activated endothelium no longer serves as an effective barrier to the passage of circulat-
ing lipoproteins into the arterial wall. Increased endothelial permeability allows the entry of
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) into the intima, a process facilitated by an elevated circulating
LDL concentration in patients with hypercholesterolemia. In addition to high LDL concentra-
tions in part from diet, several monogenic causes of elevated LDL exist, including mutations
of the LDL receptor, of apolipoprotein B, and of PCSK9, a protease involved in regulation of
the LDL receptor. Once within the intima, LDL accumulates in the subendothelial space by
binding to proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix. This “trapping” increases the residence
time of LDL within the vessel wall, where the lipoprotein may undergo chemical modif ca-
tions that can promote the development of atherosclerotic lesions. Hypertension, a major
risk factor for atherosclerosis, may further promote retention of lipoproteins in the intima by
accentuating the production of LDL-binding proteoglycans by SMC.

Oxidation is one type of modif cation that befalls LDL trapped in the subendothelial space.
It can result from the local action of reactive oxygen species and prooxidant enzymes derived
from activated endothelial or SMC, or from macrophages that penetrate the vessel wall. In
addition, the microenvironment of the subendothelial space sequesters oxidized LDL from
antioxidants in the plasma. In diabetic patients with sustained hyperglycemia, glycation of
LDL can occur—a modif cation that may ultimately render LDL antigenic and proinflamma-
tory. These biochemical alterations of LDL act early and contribute to the inflammatory mech-
anisms initiated by endothelial dysfunction, and they may continue to promote inflammation
throughout the life span of the plaque. In the fatty streak, and likely throughout plaque devel-
opment, modif ed LDL (mLDL) promotes leukocyte recruitment and foam cell formation.

Leukocyte Recruitment

Recruitment of leukocytes (primarily monocytes and T lymphocytes) to the vessel wall is
a key step in atherogenesis. The process depends on the expression of leukocyte adhesion
molecules (LAMs) on the normally nonadherent endothelial luminal surface and on che-
moattractant signals (e.g., monocyte chemotactic protein-1 [MCP-1]) that direct diapedesis
(passage of cells through the intact endothelial layer) into the subintimal space. Two major
subsets of LAM persist in the inflamed atherosclerotic plaque: the immunoglobulin gene
superfamily (especially vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 [VCAM-1] and intercellular adhe-
sion molecule-1 [ICAM-1]) and the selectins (particularly, E- and P-selectin). These LAMs and
chemoattractant signals direct mainly monocytes to the forming lesion. Hypercholesterolemia
favors accumulation in blood of a subset of monocytes that is characterized by expression
of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1 and TNF), distinguished in mice by
expression of the cell surface marker Ly6c. Although outnumbered by monocytes, T lympho-
cytes also localize within plaques and direct the adaptive immune response.

mLDL and proinflammatory cytokines can induce LAM and chemoattractant cytokine
(chemokine) expression independently, but mLDL may also stimulate endothelial and SMC
to produce proinflammatory cytokines, thereby reinforcing the direct action. This dual ability
of mLDL to promote leukocyte recruitment and inflammation directly and indirectly persists
throughout atherogenesis.

Foam Cell Formation
After monocytes adhere to and penetrate the intima, they differentiate into macrophages
and imbibe lipoproteins to form foam cells. Foam cells do not arise from uptake of LDL cho-
lesterol by classic cell surface LDL receptor—mediated endocytosis as described in Box 5-1
118 (chapter 5
BOX5-1 ‘The Lipoprotein Transport System
Lipoproteins ferry water-insoluble fats through the bloodstream. These particles consist of a lipid
core surrounded by more hydrophilic phospholipid, free cholesterol, and apolipoproteins (also
called apoproteins). The apoproteins present on various classes of lipoprotein molecules serve
as the “conductors” of the system, directing the lipoproteins to specifc tissue receptors and
mediating enzymatic reactions. Five major classes of lipoproteins exist, distinguished by their
densities, lipid constituents, and associated apoproteins. In order of increasing density, they
are chylomicrons, very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL, intermediate-density lipoproteins
(IDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDD, and high-density lipoproteins (HDL). The major steps
in the lipoprotein pathways are labeled in the f gure below and described as follows. The key
apoproteins (apo) at each stage are indicated in the f gure in parentheses.
Exogenous Pathway | Endogenous Pathway
© ]
]
]
|
© !
Nee,
a aN a i
® LPL
HL
Se @ @
|
]
]
con ]
@® |
@ Lip oprotein lipase | @ Lipoprotein lipase
i ] i
]
|
A be
——_ a | —_ a
Muscle Adipose tissue Muscle Adipose tissue
Exogenous (Intestinal) Pathway
1. Detary fats are absorbed by the small intestine and repackaged as chylomicrons, accompanied
by apo B-48. Chylomicrons are large particles, particularly rich in triglycerides, that enter the
circulation via the lymphatic system.
2. Apo Eand subtypes of apo Care transferred to chylomicrons from HDL particles in the bloodstream.
3. Apo C(subtype CI) enhances interactions of chylomicrons with lipoprotein lipase (LPL) on the
endothelial surface of adipose and muscle tissue. This reaction hydrolyzes the triglycerides
within chylomicrons into free fatty acids (FFAs), which are stored by adipose tissue or used for
energy in cardiac and skeletal muscle.
4. Chylomicron remnants are removed from the circulation by the liver, mediated by apo E
5. One fate of cholesterol in the liver is incorporation into bile acids, which are exported to the
intestine, completing the exogenous pathway cycle.
Endogenous (Hepatic) Pathway
Because dietary fat availability is not constant, the endogenous pathway provides a reliable
supply of triglycerides for tissue energy needs:
6. The liver packages cholesterol and triglycerides into VLDL particles, accompanied by apo B-100
and phospholipid. The triglyceride content of VLDL is much higher than that of cholesterol,
but this is the main means by which the liver releases cholesterol into the circulation.
Atherosclerosis 119
ee
BOX5-1 = ‘The Lipoprotein Transport System (continued)

7. VLDL is catabolized by LPL (similar to chylomicrons, as described in step 3), releasing fatty
acids to muscle and adipose tissue. During this process, VDL also interacts with HDL
exchanging some of its triglyceride for apo Csubtypes, apo E, and cholesteryl ester from
HDL The latter exchange (important in reverse cholesterol transport, as described in the next
section) is mediated by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CEIP).

8. Approximately 50% of the VLDL remnants (termed intermediate-density lipoproteins [IDL]) are
then cleared in the liver by hepatic receptors that recognize apo E

9. The remaining IDLis catabolized further by LPL and hepatic lipase (HL), which remove
additional triglyceride, apo E, and apo C forming LDL particles.

10. Plasma clearance of LDL occurs primarily via LDL receptor—mediated endocytosis in the liver
and peripheral cells, directed by LDUs apo B-100 and apo E
Cholesterol Homeostasis and Reverse Cholesterol Transport
Intracellular cholesterol content is tightly maintained by de novo synthesis, cellular uptake,
storage, and efflux from the cell. The enzyme HM+GQA reductase is the rate-limiting element of
cholesterol biosynthesis, and cellular uptake of cholesterol is controlled by receptor-mediated
endocytosis of circulating LDL (see step 10). When intracellular cholesterol levels are low,
the transcription factor sterol regulatory element—binding protein (SREBP) is released from the
endoplasmic reticulum. The active fragment of SREBP enters the nucleus to increase transcription
of HMG-@A reductase and the LDL receptor—which, through their subsequent actions, tend to
normalize the intracellular cholesterol content.
apo Al
Interna lized \
5 cholesteryl BY oe
Free ester receptor
apo AI Nascent —%
w HPL ~~ _ LCAT | Mat te
—> ad as VE, HDL CETP
@ eo"
AN A Peripheral
* Py . LJ) * cells
J)
® 2 J) J) - — alee
Under conditions of intracellular cholesterol excess (as in the f gure above), peripheral cells
increase the transcription of the AIP-binding cassette Al and Gl genes (ABCAI and ABGGI,
respectively). The ABCAI gene codes for a transmembrane protein transporter that initiates
efflux of cholesterol from the cell to lipid-poor circulating apo AI (which is synthesized by
the liver and intestine), thus forming nascent (immature) HDL particles. ABCGI facilitates
further efflux of cholesterol to form more mature HDL particles. As free cholesterol is acquired
by circulating HDL it is esterif ed by lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), an enzyme
activated by apo AI. The hydrophobic cholesteryl esters move into the particle’s core. Mbst
cholesteryl esters in HDL can then be exchanged for triglycerides in the circulation (via the
enzyme CEIP) with any of the apo B-containing lipoproteins (i.e., VUDL, IDL, LDL), which
deliver the cholesterol back to the liver. HDL can also transport cholesterol to the liver and
steroid hormone—producing tissues via the SR-BI scavenger receptor.
120 chapter 5
(e.g., aS occurs in normal hepatocytes), because the high cholesterol content in these cells
suppresses expression of that receptor. Furthermore, the classic LDL receptor does not recog-
nize modif ed LDL particles. Rather, macrophages rely on a family of “scavenger” receptors
that preferentially bind and internalize mLDL. Unlike uptake via the classic LDL receptor,
mLDL ingestion by scavenger receptors evades negative feedback inhibition and permits
engorgement of the macrophages with cholesterol and cholesteryl ester, resulting in the
typical appearance of foam cells. Although such uptake may initially provide beneft by
sequestering potentially damaging mLDL particles, the impaired efflux of these cells as com-
pared to the rate of influx, as well as local proliferation, leads to their accumulation in the
plaque. This mitigates their protective role by fueling foam cell apoptosis and the release of
proinflammatory cytokines that promote atherosclerotic plaque progression. During athero-
genesis, the clearance of dead foam cells can become ineff cient, thus promoting the accu-
mulation of cellular debris and extracellular lipids, forming the lipid-rich center of a plaque
(often termed the necrotic core).
Plaque Progression

Whereas endothelial cells play a central role in the formation of the fatty streak, SMC in the
intima promote plaque progression by producing extracellular matrix that traps lipoproteins and
adds to the bulk of the lesion. During decades of development, the typical atherosclerotic plaque
acquires a distinct thrombogenic lipid core that underlies a protective f brous cap. Not all fatty
streaks progress into f brofatty lesions, and it is unknown why some evolve and others do not.

Early plaque growth typically involves a compensatory outward remodeling of the arterial
wall that preserves the diameter of the lumen and permits plaque accumulation without limi-
tation of blood flow, hence producing no ischemic symptoms. Lesions at this stage can thus
evade detection by angiography. Later plaque growth, however, can outstrip the compensa-
tory arterial enlargement, restrict the vessel lumen, and impede perfusion. Such flow-limiting
plaques can result in tissue ischemia, causing symptoms such as angina pectoris (see Chapter 6)
or intermittent claudication of the extremities (see Chapter 15).

Many acute coronary syndromes (acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina pecto-
ris) result when the f brous cap of an atherosclerotic plaque ruptures, exposing prothrombotic
molecules within the lipid core and precipitating an acute thrombus that suddenly occludes
the arterial lumen. As described in this section, the extracellular matrix plays a pivotal role
in fortifying the fbrous cap, isolating the thrombogenic plaque interior from coagulation
substrates in the circulation.

Smooth Miscle Gell Migration
The transition from fatty streak to fbrous atheromatous plaque involves the migration of
SMC from the arterial media into the intima, proliferation of the SMC within the intima, and
secretion of extracellular matrix macromolecules by the SMC. Foam cells, activated platelets
entering through microf ssures in the plaque surface, and endothelial cells can all elaborate
substances that signal SMC migration and proliferation (Fig. 5-5).

Foam cells produce several factors that contribute to SMC recruitment. For example, they
release platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)—also released by platelets and endothelial
cells—which likely stimulates the migration of SMC across the internal elastic lamina and
into the subintimal space, where they subsequently replicate. PDGF additionally stimulates
the growth of resident SMC in the intima. Foam cells also release cytokines and growth
factors (e.g., TNF, IL-1, fbroblast growth factor, and transforming growth factor-B [TGF-B])
that further incite SMC proliferation and/or the synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins.
Furthermore, these stimulatory cytokines induce SMC and leukocyte activation, promoting
further cytokine release, thus reinforcing and maintaining inflammation in the lesion.
Atherosclerosis 121
Endothelial
Dys function
HGURE5-5. Progression from the fatty streak
involves the migration and proliferation of SMC
Substances released from foam cells, dysfunctional
endothelial cells, and platelets contribute to this
process. IL-1, interleukin-1; NO nitric oxide; PDGE
platelet-derived growth factor; PGL, prostacyclin; TG,
transforming growth factor-B; TNE tumor necrosis factor.

According to the traditional concept, plaques grow gradually and continuously, but cur-
rent evidence suggests that this progression may be punctuated by subclinical events with
bursts of smooth muscle replication. For example, morphologic evidence of resolved intra-
plaque hemorrhages indicates that breaches in plaque integrity can occur without clinical
symptoms or signs. Such plaque disruptions expose tissue factor from foam cells to blood,
which activates coagulation and microthrombus formation. Activated platelets within such
microthrombi release additional potent factors—including PDGF—that can spur a local wave
of SMC migration and proliferation.

Activated T cells also contribute to plaque evolution. Cells of the T helper 1 subtype (Th1)
produce proinflammatory cytokines that promote plaque progression and instability, while lym-
phocytes of the T helper 2 subtype (Th2) and regulatory T cells (Treg) produce factors, including
TGF-B and IL-10, which can inhibit SMC proliferation and potentially mitigate plaque growth.

Extracellular Matrix Metabolism
As the predominant collagen-synthesizing cell type, SMC favor fortif cation of the fbrous
cap. Net matrix deposition depends on the balance of its synthesis by SMC and its degrada-
tion, mediated in part by a class of proteolytic enzymes known as matrix metalloprotein-
ases (MMP). While PDGF and TGF-B stimulate production of interstitial collagens by SMC,
the Thl-derived cytokine interferon-y (IFN-y) inhibits SMC collagen synthesis. Furthermore,
inflammatory cytokines stimulate local foam cells to secrete collagen- and elastin-degrading
MMP, thereby weakening the f brous cap and predisposing it to rupture (Fig. 5-6).

Plaque Disruption

Plaque Integrity
The tug-of-war between matrix synthesis and degradation continues over decades but not
without consequences. Death of smooth muscle and foam cells, either owing to excess inflam-
matory stimulation or by contact activation of apoptosis pathways, liberates cellular contents,
contributing imbibed lipids and cellular debris to the growing lipid core. The size of the lipid
122 chapter 5
, D
_g ne ; : 7 €g "ad, tio,
3
; a2
— yy ~ . Lumen
7 DEA Conger and wave /
y) elastin Fibrous Cap
Smooth muscle Fa
(©) cell Foam (oO)
a SK a cell “
PDGF IFN-y CD40L IL-l
TGF-B C°) TNF
MCP-1 .
Lipid core
T lymphocyte
HGURE5-6. Matrix metabolism underlies f brous cap integrity. The net deposition of extracellular matrix
is the result of competing synthesis and degradation reactions. Smooth muscle cells synthesize the bulk of the
fbrous cap constituents, such as collagen and elastin. Foam cells elaborate destructive proteolytic enzymes,
such as the collagen-degrading matrix metalloproteinases (MVP) and the elastolytic cathepsins. T-lymphocyte—
derived factors favor destruction of the fbrous cap. All plaque residents, however, contribute to the cytokine
milieu of the plaque, providing multiple activating and inhibitory stimuli as shown. IFNy, interferon-y; IL-1,
interleukin-1; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; PDGE platelet-derived growth factor; TGEB,
transforming growth factor-B; TNE tumor necrosis factor. (Modif ed from Libby P. The molecular bases of
acute coronary syndromes. Grculation. 1995;91:2844—2850; Young JL, Libby P, Schénbeck U. Gytokines in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Thromb Haemost. 2002;88:554—567.)
core has biomechanical implications for the stability of the plaque. With increasing size and
protrusion into the arterial lumen, mechanical stress focuses on the plaque border abutting
normal tissue, called the shoulder region.
The structure of the f brous cap contributes to plaque integrity. Whereas lesions with thick
f brous caps may cause pronounced arterial narrowing, they have less propensity to rupture.
Conversely, plaques that have thinner caps (and often appear less obstructive by angiog-
raphy) tend to be fragile and more likely to rupture and incite thrombosis. Current clinical
terminology describes the extreme spectrums of integrity as “stable plaques” (marked by a
thick f brous cap and small lipid core) or “vulnerable plaques” (marked by a thin f brous cap,
rich lipid core, extensive macrophage inf Itrate, and a paucity of SMC; Fig. 5-7). Despite the
common use of these terms, this distinction vastly oversimplif es the heterogeneity of plaques
and may overestimate the ability to foresee a plaque’s “clinical future” based on structural
information. Most plaques with the so-called “vulnerable” morphology do not actually cause
clinical events; hence, attempts to specif cally identify such plaques may not direct therapy
in an effective manner. Moreover, a substantial minority of fatal thrombi in coronary arteries
arise from matrix-rich plaques with intact fbrous caps, a morphology that may arise from
superf cial erosion of the lesion by mechanisms that are not well understood.
Thrombogenic Potential
Rupture of atherosclerotic plaque does not inevitably cause major clinical events such
as myocardial infarction or stroke. As described in the previous section, small nonocclu-
sive thrombi may incorporate into the plaque, stimulating further smooth muscle growth
and extracellular matrix deposition (see Fig. 5-7). The balance between the thrombogenic
Atherosclerosis 123
e Normal artery
«e Early atheroma
“Stable” plaque “Vulnerable” plaque
¢ Small lipid pool * Large lipid pool
* Thick fibrous cap ¢ Thin fibrous cap
¢ Preserved lumen ¢ Many inflammatory cells
Ruptured plaque
with thrombus formation
Healed rupture
¢ Narrowed lumen Acute
¢ Fibrous intima myocardial
infarction
HGURE5-7. Stable versus vulnerable plaques. Stable plaque is characterized by a small lipid core and a
thick f brous cap, whereas vulnerable plaque tends to have a large lipid core and a relatively thin fbrous cap.
The latter is subject to rupture, resulting in thrombosis. A resulting occlusive clot can cause an acute cardiac
event, such as myocardial infarction. A lesser thrombus may resorb, but the wound-healing response stimulates
smooth muscle cell proliferation and collagen production, thereby thickening the fbrous cap and narrowing the
vessel lumen further. (Mbdif ed from Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Nature. 2002;420:868—874.)
and fbrinolytic potential of the plaque, and the fluid phase of blood, determines whether
disruption of the fbrous cap leads to a transient, nonobstructive mural thrombus or to a
completely occlusive clot.

The probability of a major thrombotic event reflects the balance between the competing
processes of clot formation and dissolution by fbrinolysis. Inflammatory stimuli found in
the plaque microenvironment (e.g., CD40L) elicit tissue factor, the initiator of the extrin-
sic coagulation pathway, from many plaque components including SMC, endothelial cells,
124 (chapter 5
Favor Occlusive Thrombus Resist Thrombus Accumulation
Procoagulant Anticoagulants
*Tissue factor ¢ Thrombomodulin
¢Heparin-like molecules
Antifib rinolytic Profib rinolytic
° PAI-1 tPA

HGURE5-8. @mpeting factors in thrombosis. The clinical manifestations of plaque disruption rely not

only on the stability of the fbrous cap but also on the thrombogenic potential of the plaque core. The balance

of physiologic mediators dictates the prominence of the thrombus, resulting in either luminal occlusion or

resorption into the plaque. PAI-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1; tPA, tissue plasminogen activator.

and macrophage-derived foam cells. Beyond enhancing expression of the potent procoagu-

lant tissue factor, inflammatory stimuli further support thrombosis by favoring the expres-

sion of antif brinolytics (e.g., plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) over the expression of
anticoagulants (e.g., thrombomodulin, heparin-like molecules) and prof brinolytic mediators

(e.g., tissue plasminogen activator; Fig. 5-8). Moreover, as described earlier, the activated

endothelium also promotes thrombin formation, coagulation, and fbrin deposition at the

vascular wall.

A person’s propensity toward coagulation may be enhanced by genetics, comorbid condi-
tions (e.g., diabetes), and/or lifestyle factors (e.g., smoking, visceral obesity). Consequently,
the concept of the “vulnerable plaque” has expanded to that of the “vulnerable patient,” to
acknowledge other contributors to a person’s vascular risk.

Cmplications of Atherosclerosis

Atherosclerotic plaques do not distribute homogeneously throughout the vasculature. They

usually develop frst in the dorsal aspect of the abdominal aorta and proximal coronary arter-

ies, followed by the popliteal arteries, descending thoracic aorta, internal carotid arteries, and
renal arteries. Therefore, the regions perfused by these vessels most commonly suffer the
consequences of atherosclerosis.

Complications of atherosclerotic plaques—including calcif cation, rupture, hemorrhage,
and embolization—can have dire clinical consequences due to acute restriction of blood flow
or alterations in vessel wall integrity. These complications, which are discussed in greater
detail in later chapters, include the following:

* Calcif cation of atherosclerotic plaque, which may increase its fragility.

* Rupture or ulceration of atherosclerotic plaque, which exposes procoagulants within the
plaque to circulating blood, causing a thrombus to form at that site. Such thrombosis can
occlude the vessel and result in infarction of the involved organ. Alternatively, the thrombus
can organize, incorporate into the lesion, and add to the bulk of the plaque.

* Hemorrhage into the plaque owing to rupture of the f brous cap or of the microvessels that
form within the lesion. The resulting intramural hematoma may further narrow the vessel
lumen.

* Embolization of fragments of disrupted atheroma to distal vascular sites.

° Weakening of the vessel wall: the f brous plaque subjects the neighboring medial layer to
increased pressure, which may provoke atrophy and loss of elastic tissue with subsequent
expansion of the artery, forming an aneurysm.

* Microvessel growth within plaques, providing a source for intraplaque hemorrhage and
further leukocyte traff cking.
Atherosclerosis 125

The complications of atherosclerotic plaque may result in specif c clinical consequences in
different organ systems (Fig. 5-9). When lesion growth eventually outstrips the compensatory
outward enlargement of the plaque, the lesion can narrow the vessel lumen and, in the case
of the coronary arteries, cause intermittent chest discomfort on exertion (angina pectoris). In
contrast, plaque that does not compromise the vessel lumen but has characteristics of vulner-
ability (e.g., a thin f brous cap, a large lipid core, spotty calcif cations) can rupture, leading
to acute thrombosis and myocardial infarction (see Chapter 7). Such nonstenotic plaques are
often numerous and dispersed throughout the arterial tree, and because they do not limit
arterial flow, they do not produce symptoms and often evade detection by exercise testing or
angiography.

The description presented here of atherogenesis and its complications can explain the limi-
tations of widely employed treatments. For example, percutaneous intervention (angioplasty
and stent placement) of symptomatic coronary stenoses effectively relieves angina pectoris,
but does not necessarily prevent future myocardial infarction or prolong life, with the excep-
tion of patients in the early phase of an acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction, as described
in Chapter 7. This disparity likely reflects the multiplicity of nonocclusive plaques at risk of
precipitating thrombotic events. It follows that lifestyle modif cations and drug therapies that
curb the risk factors for plaque formation, and lessen features associated with “vulnerability,”
provide a critical foundation for preventing progression and complications of atherosclerosis.
St.ke AAA

* Embolic stroke (4)
¢ Thrombotic stroke @ 3) Coronary artery disease
¢ Myocardial ischemia @
. [SS * Unstable angina @ (3)
% ¢ Myocardial infarction @ 3)
Renal artery disease .
¢ Atheroembolic renal disease (4) ils
* Renal artery stenosis @ /
jr
Aneurysms () 4
Peripheral artery disease
¢ Limb claudication @

@ Narrowing of vessel by fibrous plaque * Limb ischemia @ @

@ Plaque ulceration or rupture

(3) Intraplaque hemorrhage

(4) Peripheral emboli

(5) Weakening of vessel wall
HGURE5-9. Cinical sequelae of atherosclerosis. Complications of atherosclerosis arise from the
mechanisms listed in the f gure.
126 Chapters

ATHEROSCLEROSIS RISK FACTORS
In the early 20th century, most viewed atherosclerosis as an inevitable process of aging. But
in 1948, the landmark Framingham Heart Study began to examine the relationship between
specif c attributes and cardiovascular disease, establishing the concept of atherosclerotic risk
factors. Among later studies, the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT) screened
more than 325,000 men, offering an opportunity to correlate risk factors with subsequent
cardiovascular disease and mortality. Of the major risk factors, those that are not correctable
include advanced age, male gender, and heredity—that is, a history of coronary heart disease
among f rst-degree relatives at a young age (before age 55 for a male relative or before age 65
for a female relative). Risk factors for atherosclerosis amenable to modif cation include unde-
sirable concentrations and composition of circulating lipids (dyslipidemia), tobacco smoking,
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and lack of physical activity and obesity (Table 5-1).

In addition to these standard predictors, certain biologic markers associated with the devel-
opment of cardiovascular events have been undergoing rigorous evaluation as “novel” risk
markers. These include elevated circulating levels of the special lipoprotein particle Lp(a) and
certain markers of inflammation, including the acute-phase reactant C-reactive protein (CRP).
Furthermore, recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have sought to identify vari-
ants in genetic loci associated with increased cardiovascular risk.

The following sections address these risk factors and biologic markers.

(enetics

Genetic predisposition, as reflected by family history, comprises a major risk factor for athero-
sclerosis. While directly causative genes remain elusive, recent GWAS have identif ed a num-
ber of loci associated with atherosclerotic disease. The strongest connection with CAD and
myocardial infarction localizes to chromosome 9p21.3. This region contains genes that code
for two cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors that can regulate the cell cycle and may participate
in TGF-8 inhibitory pathways. Other associations with CAD include SORT-1 that encodes a
molecule implicated in lipoprotein traffcking. Such fndings promise eventually to enhance
identif cation, prevention, and treatment of atherosclerotic disease.

Genetic studies have also shown that loss of function mutations in the gene that encodes
the enzyme PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/ kexin type 9) augment LDL receptor lev-
els on cell surfaces, boosting LDL clearance, and yielding lower LDL concentrations in blood.
Individuals with loss of function variants in PCSK9, thus exposed to lower levels of LDL from
childhood than those with the typical genotype, appear protected from atherosclerotic events.
This observation has spurred the ongoing development of biological agents that limit PCSK9
action.

Mbdif able risk factors

Dyslipidemia (elevated LDL, decreased HDL)

Tobacco smoking

Hypertension

Diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome

Lack of physical activity

Nonmodif able risk factors

Advanced age

Male sex

Heredity
ee
Atherosclerosis 127
Traditional Risk Factors
Dyslipidemia
A large and consistent body of evidence establishes abnormal circulating lipid levels as a
major risk factor for atherosclerosis. Observational studies have shown that societies with
high consumption of saturated fat and prevalent hypercholesterolemia have greater mortal-
ity from coronary disease than countries with traditionally low saturated fat intake and low
serum cholesterol levels (e.g., rural Japan and certain Mediterranean nations). Similarly, data
from the Framingham Heart Study and other cohorts have shown that the risk of ischemic
heart disease increases with higher total serum cholesterol levels. The coronary risk is approx-
imately twice as high for a person with a total cholesterol level of 240 mg/dL compared with
a person whose cholesterol level is 200 mg/dL.

In particular, elevated levels of circulating LDL correlate with an increased incidence of
atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. When present in excess, LDL can accumulate in
the subendothelial space and undergo the chemical modif cations that further damage the
intima, as described earlier, initiating and perpetuating the development of atherosclerotic
lesions. Thus, LDL is commonly known as “bad cholesterol.” Conversely, elevated HDL par-
ticles (often called “good cholesterol’) associate with protection against atherosclerosis, often
attributed to HDL’s ability to transport cholesterol away from the peripheral tissues back to
the liver for disposal (termed “reverse cholesterol transport”) and its putative antioxidative
and anti-inflammatory properties. Elevated serum LDL may persist for many reasons, includ-
ing a high-fat diet or abnormalities in the LDL receptor clearance mechanism. Patients with
genetic defects in the LDL receptor, which leads to a condition known as familial hyper-
cholesterolemia, cannot remove LDL from the circulation eff ciently. Heterozygotes with this
condition have one normal and one defective gene coding for the receptor. They display high
plasma LDL levels and develop premature atherosclerosis. Homozygotes who completely lack
functional LDL receptors may experience vascular events, such as acute myocardial infarc-
tion, as early as the frst decade of life.

Increasing evidence also implicates triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, such as VLDL and IDL,
in the development of atherosclerosis. However, it remains undetermined whether these par-
ticles participate directly in the disease or simply keep company with low levels of HDL
cholesterol. Of note, poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus commonly associates with the
combination of hypertriglyceridemia and low HDL levels.

Lipid-Altering Therapy
Strategies that improve abnormal lipid levels can limit the consequences of atherosclerosis.
Many large studies of patients with coronary disease show that dietary or pharmacologic
reduction of serum cholesterol can prevent cardiovascular events.

Lifestyle modif cations that may be benef cial include avoidance of tobacco, maintenance
of healthy diet and weight, and augmented physical activity. Yet, even intensive lifestyle mod-
if cation may not be suff cient to prevent cardiovascular events in individuals with long estab-
lished atherosclerotic risk factors. Hence, many individuals require pharmacologic agents to
optimize cardiovascular outcomes. The major groups of lipid-altering agents (see Chapter 17)
include HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (also known as “statins”), niacin, f bric acid deriva-
tives, cholesterol intestinal absorption inhibitors, and bile acid-binding agents. Of these, the
statins have emerged as the key LDL-lowering drugs that reduce cardiovascular events in
broad categories of patients. These agents inhibit the rate-limiting enzyme responsible for
cholesterol biosynthesis. The resulting reduction in intracellular cholesterol concentration
promotes increased LDL receptor expression and thus augments clearance of LDL particles
from the bloodstream. Statins also lower the rate of VLDL synthesis by the liver (thus lower-
ing circulating triglyceride levels) and raise HDL by an unknown mechanism.
128 chapter 5

Major clinical trials evaluating statin therapy have demonstrated reductions in ischemic
cardiac events, the occurrence of ischemic strokes, and mortality rates in individuals both
with and without a history of prior atherosclerotic cardiovascular events. Based on previous
guideline recommendations, many clinicians use specifc serum LDL targets to adjust the
dose of statin therapy. However, in 2013, the American College of Cardiology and American
Heart Association issued updated guidelines that advocate a different approach. Based on
evidence from multiple randomized controlled clinical trials, the new recommendations focus
therapy on groups of patients most likely to beneft from lipid-lowering therapy (Table 5-2)
and recommends dosages of statins that were employed in such trials, rather than titrating
dosages based on serum lipoprotein levels. In particular, such studies have aff rmed that more
intense doses of statins improve outcomes in acute and chronic coronary heart disease more
than lower-dose regimens.

The clinical benef ts of statins likely derive from several mechanisms. Lowering LDL can
limit lipid accumulation in atherosclerotic plaques and forestall the biological consequences
detailed earlier in this chapter. Other potentially benef cial actions (so-called “pleiotropic
effects”) include reduced inflammation, a driver of atherosclerosis and its complications.
These pleiotropic effects likely result from activation of the transcription factor KLF2 and
interference with prenylation of small G proteins implicated in the regulation of inflammatory
functions of vascular cells and leukocytes. Clinical trials have provided data that support an
anti-inflammatory action of statins by showing reductions in plasma levels of CRP, a serum
marker of inflammation described later. Such analyses cannot separate the LDL-lowering
effect of statins from their anti-inflammatory mechanisms because of the prominent role of
LDL in initiating inflammatory cascades. Nonetheless, accumulating clinical and experimen-
tal data suggest that at least part of the benef t of statins derives from mechanisms other than
LDL lowering.

Other classes of drugs that lower LDL (e.g., niacin, fbrates, inhibitors of bile acid, or
cholesterol absorption from the gut) do not share the eff cacy of statins in reducing clinical
events. These agents are now primarily prescribed to patients who do not tolerate statins or
when LDL cholesterol reduction is not adequate on statin therapy alone.

Patient Type Recommendation
Cinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) High-intensity statin®
already present (1.e., history of CAD, stroke, or peripheral
vascular disease)
LDL cholesterol > 190 mg/dL High-intensity statin*
Diabetics (age 40—75 with LDL 70-189 mg/dL) and
10-year cardiac risk* > 7.5% High-intensity statin*
10-year cardiac risk* <7.5% without clinical ASCVD Moderate-intensity statin?
Nondiabetics (age 40-75 with LDL 70-189 mg/dL) without Moderate-to-high intensity statin®”

clinical ASCVD but with 10-year cardiac risk®° > 7.5%
OOOO
“High-intensity statin is intended to lower LDL cholesterol >50% (e.g., atorvastatin 40-80 mg daily or rosuvastatin
20-40 mg daily); for patients aged >75, or if at risk of statin adverse effect, consider moderate-intensity statin
instead.

‘Moderate-intensity statin is intended to lower LDL cholesterol 30%-50% (e.g., atorvastatin 10-20 mg daily,
rosuvastatin 5-10 mg daily, or simvastatin 20-40 mg daily).

‘The 10-year ASCVD risk for fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction or stroke can be estimated using the online
calculator at http://my.americanheart.org/ cvriskcalculat or

CAD, coronary artery disease.
Atherosclerosis 129

While elevated serum HDL appears to protect against atherosclerosis, recent clinical
trials have failed to show clinical beneft of pharmacologically raising HDL in contempo-
rary treated patients. For example, the prospective placebo-controlled AIM-HIGH and HPS2-
THRIVE studies demonstrated that niacin (the most effective available agent to raise serum
HDL) did not reduce cardiac event rates in patients who had already achieved desirable LDL
levels on statin therapy. In addition, recent clinical studies of two experimental drugs that
greatly raise HDL cholesterol (known as cholesteryl ester transfer protein [CETP] inhibitors)
showed no clinical benef t. Similarly, clinical trials of drug therapies that reduce elevated
triglyceride levels (i.e., using f brates or omega-3 supplements) have not shown signif cant
improvement in cardiovascular event rates. Such drugs are now used primarily to reduce
severely elevated levels of serum triglycerides to prevent the associated complication of
pancreatitis.

Tobacco Smoking

Numerous studies have shown that tobacco smoking predisposes to atherosclerosis and
ischemic heart disease. Even low level smoking leads to adverse outcomes, but the heavi-
est smokers have the greatest risk of cardiovascular events. Tobacco smoking could pro-
mote atherosclerotic disease in several ways, including enhanced oxidative modif cation
of LDL, decreased circulating HDL levels, endothelial dysfunction owing to tissue hypoxia
and increased oxidant stress, increased platelet adhesiveness, increased expression of sol-
uble LAMs, inappropriate stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system by nicotine, and
displacement of oxygen by carbon monoxide from hemoglobin. Extrapolation from animal
experiments suggests that smoking not only accelerates atherogenesis but also increases the
propensity for thrombosis—both components of the “vulnerable patient.”

Fortunately, smoking cessation can reverse some of the adverse outcomes. People who
stop smoking greatly reduce their likelihood of coronary heart disease, compared with those
who continue to smoke. In one study, after 3 years of cessation, the risk of coronary artery
disease for former smokers became similar to subjects who never smoked.

Hypertension
Elevated blood pressure (either systolic or diastolic) augments the risk of developing athero-
sclerosis, coronary heart disease, and stroke (see Chapter 13). The association of elevated blood
pressure with cardiovascular disease does not appear to have a specif c threshold. Rather, risk
increases continuously with progressively higher pressure values. Systolic pressure predicts
adverse outcomes more reliably than does diastolic pressure, particularly in older persons.

Hypertension may accelerate atherosclerosis in several ways. Animal studies have shown
that elevated blood pressure injures vascular endothelium and may increase the permeability
of the vessel wall to lipoproteins. Cyclic circumferential strain, increased in hypertensive arter-
ies, can enhance SMC production of proteoglycans that bind and retain LDL particles, promot-
ing their accumulation in the intima and facilitating their oxidative modif cation. Angiotensin
II, a mediator of hypertension (described in Chapter 13), acts not only as a vasoconstrictor
but also as a stimulator of oxidative stress (through activation of NADPH oxidases, a source
of superoxide anion, O, ) and as a proinflammatory cytokine. Thus, hypertension may also
promote atherogenesis by contributing to a prooxidant and inflammatory state.

Antihypertensive Therapy
Like dyslipidemias, treatment of hypertension should start with lifestyle modif cations but
often requires pharmacologic intervention. The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
(DASH) studies demonstrate that a diet high in fruits and vegetables, with dairy products low
130 chapter 5
in fat and an overall reduced sodium content, signif cantly improves systolic and diastolic
blood pressures. Regular exercise can also reduce resting blood pressure levels. Many medica-
tions effectively lower blood pressure, as described in Chapters 13 and 17.

Diabetes Mellitus and the “Metabolic Syndrome”
Diabetes mellitus affects an estimated 170 million people worldwide, a prevalence projected
to grow 40% worldwide by 2030. In the United States alone, 18.2 million people have dia-
betes, and projections suggest that one in every three children born in 2000 will eventually
develop the condition. With a three- to f vefold increased risk of acute coronary events, 80%
of diabetic patients succumb to atherosclerosis-related conditions, including coronary heart
disease, stroke, and peripheral artery disease.

The predisposition of diabetic patients to atherosclerosis may relate in part to accompany-
ing dyslipidemia, to nonenzymatic glycation of lipoproteins (which enhances uptake of cho-
lesterol by scavenger macrophages, as described earlier), or to the associated prothrombotic
tendency and antif brinolytic state. Diabetics frequently have impaired endothelial function,
gauged by the reduced bioavailability of NO, and increased leukocyte adhesion. Tight control
of serum glucose levels in diabetic patients reduces the risk of microvascular complications,
such as retinopathy and nephropathy. Yet demonstration of a reduction of macrovascular
outcomes, such as myocardial infarction and stroke, by glycemic control remains much more
elusive. Indeed, studies have suggested that intense glucose lowering may even augment the
incidence of adverse cardiovascular events. In contrast to the uncertain benef ts of intense
glycemic control for macrovascular events, treatment of hypertension and dyslipidemia in
diabetic patients convincingly reduces the risk of cardiac and cerebrovascular complications.

The metabolic syndrome (also known as the “insulin resistance syndrome”) refers to a
cluster of risk factors, including hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, reduced HDL, hyper-
glycemia, and visceral obesity (excessive adipose tissue in the abdomen). This constellation
associates with a high risk for atherosclerosis in both diabetic and nondiabetic patients, and
using currently accepted criteria, 25% of Americans have this condition. The presence of
insulin resistance in this syndrome appears to promote atherogenesis long before affected
persons develop overt diabetes.

Lack of Physical Activity
Exercise may mitigate atherogenesis in several ways. In addition to its benef cial effects on
the lipid profle and blood pressure, exercise enhances insulin sensitivity and endothelial
production of NO. Observational studies of both men and women indicate that even modest
activities, such as brisk walking, for as little as 30 minutes per day can protect against car-
diovascular mortality.

Estrogen Status
Cardiovascular disease dominates other causes of mortality in women, including breast and
other cancers. Before menopause, women have a lower incidence of coronary events than
men. After menopause, however, men and women have similar rates. This observation sug-
gests that estrogen (the levels of which decline after menopause) may have atheroprotec-
tive properties. Physiologic estrogen levels in premenopausal women raise HDL and lower
LDL. Experimentally, estrogen also exhibits potentially benef cial antioxidant and antiplatelet
actions and improves endothelium-dependent vasodilation.

Early observational studies suggested that hormone therapy reduced the risk of coronary
artery disease in postmenopausal women, prompting many physicians to prescribe such med-
ications for cardiovascular prevention purposes. However, the Heart and Estrogen/ Progestin
Atherosclerosis 131
Replacement Study demonstrated an association between such hormone use and an early
increased risk of vascular events in women with preexisting coronary disease. Subsequent
randomized primary prevention studies from the Women’s Health Initiative were terminated
prematurely because estrogen-plus-progestin treatment increased cardiovascular risk by 24%
overall, with a striking 81% higher risk during the frst year of therapy. Because currently
available clinical trial data do not show that gonadal hormone therapy lowers cardiovascular
events and that it may actually be harmful, such therapy should not be commenced for the
sole goal of reducing cardiovascular risk.

Biomarkers of Cardiovascular Risk
Despite identif cation of the well-established risk factors just described, one out of f ve car-
diovascular events occurs in patients lacking these attributes. In conjunction with growing
knowledge about the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, several novel markers of risk have
emerged. These biomarkers serve three primary roles: (1) as a means to help stratify the risk
of atherosclerotic disease and thus guide the choice of therapies, (2) as clinical measures to
assess treatment effects, and (3) as potential targets of new therapeutic regimens.
Lipoprotein (a)

Lipoprotein (a), referred to as Lp(a) and pronounced “L-P-little-a,” independently predicts
cardiovascular events in some studies. Lp(a) is a variant of LDL whose major apolipopro-
tein (apo B-100) links by a disulfde bridge to another protein, apo(a). Apo(a) structurally
resembles plasminogen, a plasma protein important in the endogenous lysis of fbrin clots
(see Chapter 7). Thus, the detrimental effect attributed to Lp(a) may relate to competition
with normal plasminogen activity. Lp(a) is able to enter the arterial intima, and in vitro stud-
ies have shown that it encourages inflammation and thrombosis.

Lp(a) levels in the population are skewed and not normally distributed, showing a trail-
ing prevalence of the higher levels. Not all population studies support a link between Lp(a)
and cardiovascular events, though people with the highest Lp(a) levels do appear to have
increased risk. Recent GWAS and Mendelian randomization analyses also support a causal
link between Lp(a) and cardiovascular events.

Diet and exercise have little impact on Lp(a) levels. Of current lipid-lowering agents, niacin
has the greatest effect on Lp(a), lowering its concentration by as much as 20%. However, thus far,
there is no evidence that reduction of Lp(a) by drug therapy improves cardiovascular outcomes.

GReactive Protein (CRP) and Other Markers of Inf ammation
Because the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis involves inflammation at every stage, markers of
inflammation have undergone evaluation as predictors of cardiac risk. Recall that the process
of lipoprotein entry and modif cation in the vessel wall triggers the release of cytokines, fol-
lowed by leukocyte inf Itration, more cytokine release, and smooth muscle migration into—
and proliferation within—the intima. Involved cytokines (e.g., IL-6) incite increased hepatic
production of acute-phase reactants, including CRP, f brinogen, and serum amyloid A.

Of these molecules, CRP has shown the greatest promise as a marker of low-grade systemic
inflammation associated with atherosclerotic disease. Large studies of apparently healthy
men and women indicate that those with higher basal CRP levels have increased risk of
adverse cardiovascular outcomes, independent of serum cholesterol concentrations and other
traditional risk markers. Multiple prospective studies affrm that CRP measured by a highly
sensitive assay (hsCRP) independently predicts myocardial infarction, stroke, peripheral
artery disease, and sudden cardiac death. Although it serves as a marker of risk not captured
by traditional algorithms, CRP itself does not mediate atherogenesis.
132 chapter 5

Recent data support the use of CRP levels to potentially guide therapy. For example, the
prospective JUPITER trial studied 17,800 healthy individuals with above-median levels of
CRP who did not have elevated LDL and demonstrated a reduced incidence of major car-
diovascular events in patients who were treated with statin therapy, compared to those who
received a placebo.

Given the critical role of inflammation in atherogenesis, ongoing clinical trials are testing
available and novel anti-inflammatory medications for the prevention of recurrent cardiovas-
cular events among patients with coronary disease.

Outlook
Despite accumulating knowledge of the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and its clinical sequelae,
this disease remains a major cause of death throughout the world. Although improvements in
cardiovascular care have reduced age-adjusted mortality from this condition, it will continue
to grow as a menace as the population ages and as developing countries embrace the adverse
dietary and activity habits of a Western lifestyle. Ongoing research of the biology of athero-
sclerosis, as well as advances in therapeutic procedures and medications, will undoubtedly
continue to further our abilities to combat this condition. Yet we have not fully capitalized on
what we already know—that much cardiovascular risk is modif able. Effective control of the
risk factors described earlier remains a critical component to tame this global scourge. It is here
that the relationship between the patient and health care provider, and the role of medical pro-
fessionals as community leaders advocating healthy lifestyles, remain of cardinal importance.
SUMMARY
e Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in developed nations and
has become a major cause of death in the developing world.
e The arterial wall consists of the intima (closest to the arterial lumen), the media (the middle
layer), and the adventitia (the outer layer).
° The normal endothelium provides a protective, nonthrombogenic surface with homeostatic
vasodilatory and anti-inflammatory properties.
° Early in atherogenesis, injurious stimuli activate endothelial and smooth muscle cells, which
recruit inflammatory cells to the vessel wall.
e Atherosclerotic plaques form over decades and can display features associated with clinical
stability, or a propensity to provoke thrombotic events (“vulnerable” plaques).
° Clinical atherosclerotic events result from narrowing of the vessel lumen, aneurysm forma-
tion, or plaque disruption with superimposed thrombus formation.
* Common manifestations of atherosclerosis include angina pectoris, myocardial infarction,
stroke, and peripheral artery disease.
° Modif able risk factors for atherosclerosis include dyslipidemia, smoking, hypertension, and
diabetes.
° Nonmodif able risk factors include advanced age, male sex, and a family history of prema-
ture coronary disease.
° Novel biomarkers, such as high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), may prove useful in
def ning risk.
Acknowledgments
Contributors to the previous editions of this chapter were Jordan B. Strom, MD; James L.
Young, MD; Mary Beth Gordon, MD; Rushika Fernandopulle, MD; Gopa Bhattacharyya, MD;
and Joseph Loscalzo, MD, PhD.
Atherosclerosis 133

Additional Reading

Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators. Moore KJ, Tabas I. Macrophages in the pathogenesis of
Eff cacy and safety of LDL-lowering therapy among atherosclerosis. Cell. 2011;145:341-355.
men and women: meta-analysis of individual data from Schunkert H, et al. Large-scale association analysis identif es
174 000 participants in 27 randomised trials. Lancet. 13 new susceptibility loci for coronary artery disease.
2015;385:1397-1405. Nat Genet. 2011;43:333-338.

Cook NR, Paynter NP, Eaton CB, et al. Comparison of the Stein EA, Mellis S, Yancopoulos GD, et al. Effect of a monoclo-
Framingham and Reynolds risk scores for global cardio- nal antibody to PCSK9 on LDL cholesterol. N Engl J Med.
vascular risk prediction in the multiethnic women’s health 20123366: 1108-1118.
initiative. Circulation. 2012;125:1748-1756. Steinberg D. In celebration of the 100th anniversary of

Gimbrone MA, Jr., Garcia-Cardena G. Vascular endothelium, the lipid hypothesis of atherosclerosis. J Lipid Res.
hemodynamics, and the pathobiology of atherosclerosis. 2013;54:2946-2949.

Cardiovasc Pathol. 2013;22:9-15. Stone NJ, Robinson J, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/ AHA

Bornfeldt KE, Tabas I. Insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce
atherosclerosis. Cell Metab. 2011;14:575—-585. atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults. Circulation.

Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb 2013;129:S1—-S45. DOI: 10. 1161/01 .cir.0000437738.

Vasc Biol. 2012;32:2045-2051. 63853.7a.

Libby P. Mechanisms of acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Tsimikas S, Hall JL. Lipoprotein(a) as a potential causal
Med. 2013;369:883-884. genetic risk factor of cardiovascular disease: A rationale

Libby P, Ridker PM, Hansson GK. Progress and challenges for increased efforts to understand its pathophysiol-
in translating the biology of atherosclerosis. Nature. ogy and develop targeted therapies. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2011;473:317-325. 2012;60:716—721.
Ischemic Heart Disease
Jayme Wilder
Marc S. Sabatine
Leonard S. Lilly
Chapter Outline [: 1772, the British physician William Heberden reported a
————————————— disorder in which patients developed an uncomfortable sen-
» Owen Si “ a sation in the chest when walking. Labeling it angina pectoris,
corey dial ‘Ogeen supply Heberden noted that this discomfort would disappear soon after
Myocardial Oxygen Demand the patient stood still but would recur with similar activities.
Pathophysiology of Ischemia Although he did not know the cause, it is likely that he was
Fixed Vessel Narrowing the first to describe the symptoms of ischemic heart disease,
Fndothelial Cell Dysfunction a condition of imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply
oer — of Myocardial and demand most often caused by atherosclerosis of the coro-
Consequences of Ischemia nary arteries. Ischemic heart disease now afficts millions of
Ischemic Syndromes Americans and is the leading cause of death in industrialized
Ginical Features of Chronic nations.
Stable Angina The clinical presentation of ischemic heart disease
History _ can be highly variable and forms a spectrum of syndromes
ce aination (Table 6-1). For example, ischemia may be accompanied by
es the same exertional symptoms described by Heberden. In
Treatment other cases, it may occur without any clinical manifesta-
Medical Treatment of an Acute tions at all, a condition termed silent ischemia. This chapter
Episode of Angina describes the causes and consequences of chronic ischemic
Medical Treatment Lo Prevent heart disease syndromes and provides a framework for the
ee diagnosis and treatment of affected patients.
Acute Cardiac Events Angina pectoris remains the most common manifestation
—_— of ischemic heart disease and literally means “strangling in
the chest.” Although other conditions may lead to similar
discomfort, angina refers specifically to the uncomfortable
sensation in the chest and neighboring structures that arises
from an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and
demand.
