.
i i
Hypertension via
oe
Joshua Drago \ i
Gordon H. Williams iv
Leonard S. Lilly
Chapter Outline O ver 70 million Americans, and 1 billion people through-
Nee out the world, have hypertension—a blood pressure (BP)
ahhat Is Hypertension: high enough to be a danger to their well-being. This number
semen will undoubtedly rise; data from the Hamingham Heart Study
Hemodynamic Factors indicate that 90% of people over age 55 will develop hyper-
Blood Pressure Reflexes tension during their lifetimes. Thus, this condition represents
Fssential Hypertension a great public health concern because it is a major risk factor
Genetics and Epidemiology for coronary artery disease, stroke, heart failure, renal disease,
Expeumental Findings and peripheral vascular disease. Surprisingly, two thirds of
Natural History . . .
————— hypertensive persons are either unaware of their elevated BP
a or are not treated adequately to minimize the cardiovascu-
Exogenous Causes lar risk. Moreover, because elevated BP is usually asymptom-
Renal Gauses atic until an acute cardiovascular event strikes, screening for
Mechanical Causes hypertension is a critical aspect of preventive medicine.
Cinical Signs and Symptoms cee IDS, PEPSI OLE ELIE OS
Organ Damage Caused by cause of the BP elevation is unknown, a condition termed
Hypertension primary or essential hypertension (EH). Evidence suggests
Hypertensive Cisis that the causes of FH are multiple and diverse, but considera-
Treatment of Hypertension ble insight into those causes can be achieved by studying the
ae iceman normal physiology of BP control, as examined in this chapter.
gic lreatment High BP attributed to a defnable cause is termed
secondary hypertension. Although far less common than
FH, conditions that cause secondary hypertension are impor-
tant because many are amenable to permanent cure. Notably,
310
Hypertension 311
WHAT IS HYPERTENSION? 170
. . . 160
BP values vary widely in the population and
tend to increase with age, as illustrated in S 150
Figure 13-1. The risk of a vascular complica- ¢ 140 Systoli
tion increases progressively and linearly with £E 130 yswons
higher BP values, so the exact cutoff points to =
defne stages of hypertension are somewhat @ 120 —s— Males
arbitrary. The currently accepted criteria are 5 110 —O— Females
listed in Table 13-1. By this classif cation, a 3 100
diastolic pressure consistently >90 mm Hg or a
a systolic pressure >140 mm Hg establishes Diastolic
the diagnosis of hypertension. Those with pre- 80
hypertension (systolic 120 to 139 mm Hg or 70
diastolic 80 to 99 mm Hg) have an increased 16-19 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 >70
risk of developing defnite hypertension over Age (years)
time. Although the emphasis has historically . .
. . HGURE13-1. Relationship between blood
been on the level of diastolic pressure, more _ ;

; ; pressure and age (n = 1,029). Systolic (upper
recent evidence suggests that systolic pres- curves) and diastolic (lower curves) values are shown.
sure more accurately predicts cardiovascular Notice that by age 60, the average systolic pressure of
complications. women exceeds that of men. (Mbdif ed from Kotchen

JM McKean HE Kotchen TA Blood pressure trends
with aging. Hypertension. 1982;4(suppl. 3):111—129.)
HOW IS BLOOD PRESSURE REGULATED?
Hemodynamic Factors
BP is the product of cardiac output (CO) and total peripheral resistance (TPR):
BP = CO x TPR
And CO is the product of cardiac stroke volume (SV) and heart rate (HR):
CO=SV x HR

As described in Chapter 9, SV is determined by (1) cardiac contractility; (2) the venous
return to the heart (preload); and (3) the resistance the left ventricle must overcome to eject
blood into the aorta (afterload).

It follows that at least four systems are directly responsible for BP regulation: the heart,
which supplies the pumping pressure; the blood vessel tone, which largely determines sys-
temic resistance; the kidney, which regulates intravascular volume; and hormones, which
modulate the functions of the other three systems. Figure 13-2 shows how factors related to
these systems contribute to CO and TPR.

TABLE 13-1

Category Systolic Pressure (mm Hg) Diastolic Pressure (mm Hg)

Normal <120 And <80

Prehypertension 120-139 Or 80-89

Stage 1 hypertension 140-159 Or 90-99

Stage 2 hypertension = 160 Or = 100
sss
Modif ed from Chobanian AV Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The seventh report of the Joint National G@mmittee on
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. JAMA 2003;289:2560-2572.
312 chapter 13
* PSNS (1) Angiotensin (1) *a,-Receptors (Tt) * Nitric oxide () * Hematocrit (1)
* SNS (7) *Catecholamines (ft) *B-Receptors (J) * [H"] (J)
* Catecholamines (f) ¢ Adenosine (|)
¢ Prostaglandins (|)
¢ Endothelin (ft)
* Oxygen (T)
¢ Catecholamines (f)
* SNS (7)
* SNS (7)
* Catecholamines (7)
* Thirst (t)
¢ Aldosterone (ft)
* ADH (7)
* SNS (7)
* NP(L)
HIGURE 13-2. Regulation of systemic blood pressure. The small arrows indicate whether there is a stimulatory
(t) or inhibitory (|) effect on the boxed parameters. ADH, antidiuretic hormone; HR, heart rate; NP, natriuretic
peptides; PSNS, parasympathetic nervous system; SNS, sympathetic nervous system; SV stroke volume.

The renal component of BP regulation deserves special mention, in light of the temptation to
view hypertension simply as a cardiovascular problem. No matter how high the CO or TPR, renal
excretion has the capacity to completely return BP to normal by reducing intravascular volume.
Therefore, the maintenance of chronic hypertension requires renal participation. Transplantation
studies have conf rmed this point: the implantation of a kidney from a normotensive person into
a hypertensive one typically improves the BP. Similarly, surgical placement of a kidney from a
genetically hypertensive rat into a previously normotensive one usually leads to hypertension.

In the presence of normally functioning kidneys, an increase in BP leads to augmented
urine volume and sodium excretion, which then returns the BP to normal. This process,
known as pressure natriuresis, is blunted in the kidneys of hypertensive patients; thus, higher
pressures are required to excrete a given sodium and water load. Current evidence suggests
at least two possible reasons for this blunted response. First, microvascular and tubulointer-
stitial injury within the kidneys of hypertensive patients impairs sodium excretion. Second,
the defect may lie with hormonal factors critical to appropriate renal reactions to the sodium
and intravascular volume environment (e.g., the renin—angiotensin system, as described later
in the chapter). In contrast to the frst possibility, abnormalities of hormonal regulation are
amenable to correction with appropriate therapy.
oo Eyperrtension 313
Blood Pressure Ref exes

The cardiovascular system is endowed with feedback mechanisms that continuously monitor
arterial pressure: they sense when the pressure becomes excessively high or low and then
respond rapidly to those changes. One such mechanism is the baroreceptor ref ex, which is
mediated by receptors in the walls of the aortic arch and the carotid sinuses. The baroreceptors
monitor changes in pressure by sensing the stretch and deformation of the arteries. If the arterial
pressure rises, the baroreceptors are stimulated, increasing their transmission of impulses to the
central nervous system (i.e., the medulla). Negative feedback signals are then sent back to the
circulation via the autonomic nervous system, causing the BP to fall back to its baseline level.

The higher the BP rises, the more the baroreceptors are stretched and the greater the
impulse transmission rate to the medulla. Signals from the carotid sinus receptors are carried
by the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX), whereas those from the aortic arch recep-
tors are carried by the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X). These nerve fibers converge at the trac-
tus solitarius in the medulla, where the baroreceptor impulses inhibit sympathetic nervous
system outf ow and excite parasympathetic effects. The net result is (1) a decline in peripheral
vascular resistance (i.e., vasodilation) and (2) a reduction in CO (because of a lower HR and
reduced contractility). Each of these effects tends to lower arterial pressure back toward its
baseline. Conversely, when a fall in systemic pressure is sensed by the baroreceptors, fewer
impulses are transmitted to the medulla, leading to a ref exive increase in BP.

The main effect of the baroreceptor mechanism is to modulate moment-by-moment varia-
tions in systemic BP. However, the baroreceptor ref ex is not involved in the long-term regu-
lation of BP and does not prevent the development of chronic hypertension. The reason for
this is that the baroreceptors constantly reset themselves. After a day or two of exposure to
higher-than-baseline pressures, the baroreceptor-firing rate slows back to its control value,
and a new Set point is established.

ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION
Approximately 90% of hypertensive patients have BPs that are elevated for no readily defin-
able reason, and are considered to have EH. The diagnosis of EH is one of exclusion; it is the
option left to the clinician after considering the causes of secondary hypertension described
later in this chapter.

EH is more a description than a diagnosis, indicating only that a patient manifests a specific
physical finding (high BP) for which no cause has been found. In all likelihood, different under-
lying defects are responsible for the elevated pressure in different subpopulations of patients.
Because the exact nature of these defects is unknown, to understand EH is to understand the
possibilities: what could go wrong with normal physiology to produce chronically elevated BP?

This description of EH therefore ref ects what is currently known about its genetics and
epidemiology, experimental findings, and natural history. The picture that emerges is that EH
likely results from multiple defects of BP regulation that interact with environmental stress-
ors. The regulatory defects may be acquired or genetically determined and may be indepen-
dent of one another. As a result, EH patients exhibit varied combinations of abnormalities
and, therefore, have various physiologic bases for their elevated BPs.

Genetics and Epidemiology
Strong support for the role of heredity in EH is evident in the higher rate of elevated BP among
first-degree relatives of hypertensive patients than in the general population. Further, concor-
dance between identical twins is high and significantly greater than it is that between dizygotic
twins. However, no singular, consistent genetic marker for hypertension has been identified.
Instead, it seems likely that EH is a complex polygenic disorder, involving several loci.
314 (chapter 13

While autosomal dominant contributors to elevated BP have been discovered, such
abnormalities are rare and are thought to represent only a small fraction of hypertensive
patients. With respect to loci that affect hypertension in a polygenic way, genes regulating the
renin—an giotensin—aldosterone axis have been most thoroughly studied because of the central
role of this system in determining intravascular volume and vascular tone. Within this group,
certain polymorphisms in the genes for angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE), the angiotensin type-l receptor, and aldosterone synthase confer a small increase in the
risk of developing hypertension. Additionally, polymorphisms in the gene for alpha-adducin,
a cytoskeletal protein, may be involved in a subgroup of EH patients, possibly by increas-
ing renal tubular sodium absorption. Finally, as described later in the chapter, signif cant
associations exist among hypertension and obesity, insulin resistance, and diabetes. These
conditions are all characterized by similar complex inheritance patterns, some of which may
overlap with the genetic underpinnings of hypertension.

As genetics cannot explain the complete basis of hypertension, it stands to reason that the
environment also plays a role. Indeed, hypertension has been epidemiologically linked to low
socioeconomic status, certain dietary and exercise patterns, poor access to health care, and
comorbid medical conditions such as obesity, diabetes, and kidney disease. Thus, the heri-
table traits described above most likely predispose individuals to develop hypertension after
exposure to certain environmental triggers.

Experimental Findings

Systemic Abnormalities
Multiple defects in BP regulation have been found in EH patients and their relatives. By them-
selves, or in conjunction with one another, these abnormalities may contribute to chronic
BP elevation.

The heart can contribute to a high CO-based hypertension owing to sympathetic over-
activity. For example, when tested under psychologically stressful conditions, hypertensive
patients (and their frst-degree relatives) often develop excessive HR acceleration compared
with control subjects, suggesting an excessive sympathetic response.

The blood vessels may contribute to peripheral vascular resistance—based hypertension
by constricting in response to (1) increased sympathetic activity; (2) abnormal regulation of
vascular tone by local factors, including nitric oxide, endothelin, and natriuretic factors; or (3)
ion channel defects in contractile vascular smooth muscle.

The kidney can induce volume-based hypertension by retaining excessive sodium and
water as a result of (1) failure to regulate renal blood flow appropriately; (2) ion channel
defects (e.g., reduced basolateral Na*K*-ATPase), which directly cause sodium retention;
or (3) inappropriate hormonal regulation. For example, the renin—angiotensin—aldoste-
rone axis is an important hormonal regulator of peripheral vascular resistance. Renin
levels in EH patients (compared with those in normotensive persons) are subnormal in
25%, normal in approximately 60%, and high in 10% to 15%. Because renin secretion
should be suppressed by high BP, even “normal” levels are inappropriate in hyperten-
sives. Thus, abnormalities of this system’s regulation may play a role in some individuals
with EH.

Figure 13-3 highlights these and other potential mechanisms of EH. Note that although
the heart, blood vessels, and kidneys are the organs ultimately responsible for producing
the pressure, primary defects may be located elsewhere as well (e.g., the central ner-
vous system, arterial baroreceptors, and adrenal hormone secretion). Yet, although abnor-
mal regulation at these sites can contribute to elevated BP, it is important to remember
that without renal complicity, malfunction of other systems would not produce sustained
hypertension, since the normal kidney is capable of eliminating suff cient volume to return
the BP to normal.
Hypertension 315
* t Basalsympathetic tone
¢ Abnormal stress response
Functional: ¢ Abnormal response to signals from
* | Nitric oxide secretion baroreceptors and volume receptors
¢ t Endothelin production
* Ca** or Na*/K* channel defects
Structural: a
° Exaggerated medial t/
hypertrophy .
¢ Catecholamine leak 5 - ¢ RAA dys function
or malregulation * Ion channel defects (e.g., Na*/K*/2Cl-
cotransporter, basolateral Na*/K* ATPase,
Ca** ATPase)
HGURE 13-3. Potential primary abnormalities in essential hypertension (HH). These defects are
supported by experimental evidence, but their specif c contributions to EH remain unknown. CNS, central
nervous system; RAA, renin—angiotensin—aldosterone system.
Insulin Resistance, Obesity, and the Metabolic Syndrome
Recent research has suggested that the hormone insulin may play a role in the develop-
ment of EH. In many people with hypertension, especially those who are obese or have type
2 diabetes, there is impaired insulin-dependent transport of glucose into many tissues (termed
insulin resistance). As a result, serum glucose levels rise, stimulating the pancreas to release
additional insulin. Elevated insulin levels may contribute to hypertension via increased sym-
pathetic activation or by stimulation of vascular smooth muscle cell hypertrophy, which
increases vascular resistance. Smooth muscle cell hypertrophy may be caused by a direct
mitogenic effect of insulin or through enhanced sensitivity to platelet-derived growth factor.
Obesity itself has been directly associated with hypertension. Possible explanations for this
relationship include (1) the release of angiotensinogen from adipocytes as substrate for the
renin—angiotensin system; (2) augmented blood volume related to increased body mass; and
(3) increased blood viscosity caused by adipocyte release of prof brinogen and plasminogen
activator inhibitor |. The current epidemic of obesity has led to a dramatic increase in the num-
ber of people with metabolic syndrome. As described in Chapter 5, this condition represents a
clustering of atherogenic risk factors, including hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, low serum
high-density lipoprotein (HDL), a tendency toward glucose intolerance, and truncal obesity.
Current evidence suggests that insulin resistance is central to the pathogenesis of this clustering.
Natural History
EH characteristically arises after young adulthood. Its prevalence increases with age, and
more than 60% of Americans older than 60 years are hypertensive. In addition, the hemody-
namic characteristics of BP elevation in EH tend to change over time. The systolic pressure
increases throughout adult life, while the diastolic pressure rises until about the age of
316 (chapter 13
100%
90%
80%
10% WE isolated systolic
hypertension
60%
WW Systolic and diastolic
50% hypertension
40%
° BB Isolated diastolic
30% hypertension
20%
10%
0%
<40 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-79 >80
Age (years)
FIGURE 13-4. Qategories of blood pressure elevation in untreated hypertensive patients. Isolated
systolic hypertension predominates in patients older than 50 years, primarily as a result of decreased vascular
compliance. (Mbdif ed from Franklin SS, Jacobs MJ, Wong ND, et al. Predominance of isolated systolic
hypertension among middle aged and elderly US hypertensives: analysis based on National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES IIT). Hypertension. 2001;37:869-874. )
50 and then declines slightly thereafter (see Fig. 13-1). Accordingly, diastolic hypertension is
more common in young people, while a substantial number of hypertensive patients over age
50 have isolated systolic hypertension with normal diastolic values (see Fig. 13-4).

In younger persons with hypertension, elevated BP tends to be driven by high CO in the
setting of relatively normal peripheral vascular resistance, termed the hyperkinetic phase of
EH (Fig. 13-5). With advancing age, however, the effect of CO declines, perhaps because of
the development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and its consequent reduced diastolic
f lling (which in turn reduces SV and CO). Conversely, vascular resistance increases with
age due to medial hypertrophy as the vessels adapt to the prolonged pressure stress. Thus,
younger hypertensive patients often display augmented CO as the principal abnormality, and
older patients tend to have elevated TPR as the major hemodynamic f nding.

In summary, EH is a syndrome that may arise from many potential abnormalities, but it
exhibits a characteristic hemodynamic prof le and natural history. It is likely that multiple
defects, separately inherited or acquired, act together to chronically raise BP. Although we
may not understand the precise underlying mechanisms in individual hypertensive patients,
we can at least describe the kinds of pathophysiology that might be at fault.

Co .
Cardiac ~~. a cee TR)
output (CO) wee ° ‘contribution
contribution to
to blood blood
pressure
pressure
ad
Increasing age
HGURE 13-5. Hemodynamic progression of essential hypertension (EH). Schematic representation of the
changing contribution of cardiac output (CO) and total peripheral resistance (TPR) as age increases in many
patients with FH.
So ypertension 317
SECONDARY HYPERTENSION
Although EH dominates the clinical picture, a defined structural or hormonal cause for hyper-
tension may be found in a small percentage of patients. Identification of such cases of sec-
ondary hypertension is important because the underlying conditions may require therapy
different from that administered for EH, and they are often curable. Moreover, if secondary
hypertension is left uncontrolled, adaptive cardiovascular changes may develop analogous
to those of long-standing EH that could cause the elevated pressures to persist even after the
underlying cause is corrected.
Although secondary forms should be considered in the workup of all patients with hyperten-
sion, there are clues that a given patient may have one of the correctable conditions (Table 13-2):
1. Age. If a patient develops hypertension before age 20 or after age 50 (outside the usual
range of EH), secondary hypertension is more likely.
2. Severity. Secondary hypertension often causes BP to rise dramatically, whereas most EH
patients usually have mild-to-moderate hypertension.
3. Onset. Secondary forms of hypertension often present abruptly in a patient who was previ-
ously normotensive, rather than gradually progressing over years as is the usual case in EH.
4. Associated signs and symptoms. The process that induces hypertension may give rise to
other characteristic abnormalities, identified by the history and physical examination. For
example, a renal artery bruit (swishing sound caused by turbulent blood f ow through a ste-
notic artery) may be heard on abdominal examination in a patient with renal artery stenosis.
5. Family history. EH patients often have hypertensive first-degree relatives, whereas second-
ary hypertension more commonly occurs sporadically.
Patient Evaluation
The usual clinical evaluation of a patient with recently diagnosed hypertension begins with a
careful history and physical examination, including a search for clues to the secondary forms.
For example, repeated urinary tract infections may suggest the presence of chronic pyelonephritis
Percent of
Type Hypertensive Patients Cinical Cues
Essential ~90% * Age of onset: 20-50 years
* Family history of hypertension
* Normal serum K’, urinalysis
Chronic renal disease 2% 4% * ¢ Geatinine, abnormal urinalysis
Primary aldosteronism <2%-15% ° | Serum K
(varies by sensitivity of
screening)
Renovascular 1% * Abdominal bruit
* Sudden onset (especially if age >50 or <20)
° | Serum K
Pheochromocytoma 0.2% * Paroxysms of palpitations, diaphoresis, and headache
° Weight loss
* Episodic hypertension in one third of patients
Q@arctation of the 0.1% * Blood pressure in arms > legs, or right arm > left arm
aorta * Midsystolic murmur between scapulae
* Chest x-ray: aortic indentation, rib notching due to
arterial collaterals
Cushing syndrome 0.1% * “Cishingoid” appearance (e.g., central obesity, hirsutism)
LESS ce]
318 chapter 13
with renal damage as the cause of hypertension. Excessive weight loss may be an indicator
of pheochromocytoma, whereas weight gain may point to the presence of Cushing syndrome
(these conditions are described below). The history also should include an assessment of lifestyle
behaviors that may contribute to hypertension, such as excessive alcohol consumption, and the
patient’s medications should be reviewed because certain drugs (see next section) may elevate
BP. Obstructive sleep apnea is commonly associated with hypertension and should be considered
particularly in patients who snore and have a history of hypertension refractory to medications.
Laboratory tests commonly performed in the initial evaluation of the hypertensive patient,
including general screening for secondary causes, are (1) urinalysis and measurement of the serum
concentration of creatinine and blood urea nitrogen to evaluate for renal abnormalities; (2) serum
potassium level (abnormally low in renovascular hypertension [RH] or aldosteronism); (3) blood
glucose level (elevated in diabetes, which is strongly associated with hypertension and renal dis-
ease); (4) serum cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels, as part of the global vascular
risk screen; and (5) an electrocardiogram (for evidence of LVH caused by chronic hypertension).
If no abnormalities are found that suggest a secondary form of hypertension, the patient
is presumed to have EH and treated accordingly. If, however, the patient’s BP continues to
be elevated despite standard treatments, then more detailed diagnostic testing may be under-
taken to search for specif c secondary causes.
Fxogenous Causes
Several medications can elevate BP. For example, oral contraceptives may cause secondary
hypertension in some women. The mechanism is likely related to increased activity of the
renin—angiotensin system. Estrogens increase the hepatic synthesis of angiotensinogen, lead-
ing to greater production of angiotensin II (Fig. 13-6). Angiotensin II raises BP by several
RENIN
(secreted by
kidney)
ANGIOTENSIN- HGURE 13-6. ‘The renin—
CONVERTING ENZYME angiotensin—aldosterone system.
Liver-derived angiotensinogen
is cleaved in the circulation
by renin (of kidney origin) to
form angiotensin I (AI). Al is
rapidly converted to the potent
vasoconstrictor angiotensin II
(AIT) by angiotensin-converting
enzyme. AII also modulates the
release of aldosterone from the
Arterialsmooth muscle: Vasoconstriction adrenal cortex. Aldosterone in
Adrenal gland: t Aldosterone (frenal Na* reabsorption) turn acts to reabsorb Na” from
Sympathetic nervous Facilitates release of norepinephrine the distal nephron, resulting in
system: increased intravascular volume. The
Kidney: + Renal tubular Na” reabsorption other listed effects of AIT receptor
Brain: Stimulates thirst and vasopressin secretion stimulation may also contribute 0
Heart: Enhances contractility and ventricular hypertrophy the development and maintenance
of hypertension.
Hypertension 319
mechanisms, most notably by direct vasoconstriction and by stimulating the adrenal release
of aldosterone. The latter hormone causes renal sodium retention and, therefore, increased
intravascular volume.

Other medications that can raise BP include glucocorticoids, cyclosporine (an antirejection
drug used in patients with organ transplants), erythropoietin (a hormone that increases bone
marrow red blood cell formation and elevates BP by increasing blood viscosity and reversing
local hypoxic vasodilatation), and sympathomimetic drugs (which are common in over-the-
counter cold remedies). Nonsteroidal anti-inf ammatory drugs can contribute to hypertension
through dose-related augmentation of renal sodium and water retention.

Two other substances that may contribute to hypertension are ethanol (1.e., chronic exces-
sive consumption) and cocaine. Both of these are associated with increased sympathetic
nervous system activity.

Renal Causes
Given the crucial role of the kidney in the control of BP, it is not surprising that renal
dysfunction can lead to hypertension. In fact, renal disease contributes to two important
endogenous causes of secondary hypertension: renal parenchymal disease, accounting for
2% to 4% of hypertensive patients, and RH (renal arterial stenosis), which accounts for
approximately 1%.

Renal Parenchymal Disease
Parenchymal damage to the kidney can result from diverse pathologic processes. The major
mechanism by which injury leads to elevated BP is through increased intravascular volume.
Damaged nephrons are unable to excrete normal amounts of sodium and water, leading to a
rise in intravascular volume, elevated CO, and hence increased BP.

If renal function is only mildly impaired, BP may stabilize at a level at which the higher
systemic pressure (and therefore renal perfusion pressure) enables sodium excretion to bal-
ance sodium intake. Conversely, if a patient has end-stage renal failure, the glomerular fil-
tration rate may be so greatly decreased that the kidneys simply cannot excrete sufficient
volume, and malignant-range BP may follow. Renal parenchymal disease may further contrib-
ute to hypertension even if the glomerular filtration rate is not greatly reduced, through the
excessive elaboration of renin.

Renovascular Hypertension

Stenosis of one or both renal arteries leads to hypertension. Although emboli, vasculitis, and
external compression of the renal arteries can be responsible, the two most common causes of
RH are atherosclerosis and fibromuscular dysplasia. Atherosclerotic lesions arise from exten-
sive plaque formation either within the renal artery or in the aorta at the origin of the renal
artery. This form accounts for about two thirds of cases of RH and occurs most commonly in
elderly men. In contrast, f bromuscular lesions consist of discrete regions of fibrous or mus-
cular proliferation, generally within the arterial media. Fibromuscular dysplasia accounts for
one third of cases of RH and characteristically occurs in young women.

The elevated BP in RH arises from reduced renal blood f ow to the affected kidney, which
responds to the lower perfusion pressure by secreting renin. The latter raises the BP through
the subsequent actions of angiotensin II (vasoconstriction) and aldosterone (sodium reten-
tion), as shown in Figure 13-6.

The diagnosis of RH is suggested by an abdominal bruit, which can be found in 40% to
60% of patients, or by the presence of unexplained hypokalemia (owing to excessive renal
320 chapter 13
excretion of potassium as a result of an elevated aldosterone level). The diagnosis can be con-
firmed, when invasive interventions are being considered, by duplex Doppler ultrasonography,
computed tomographic angiography (CTA), or magnetic resonance angiography of the renal
arteries.

Therapy of RH with antihypertensive drugs is often effective, particularly when an angio-
tensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker is included. These
inhibitors of the renin—angiotensin system negate the hypertensive effects of elevated circu-
lating renin in RH by impeding the formation or action of angiotensin II (see Chapter 17).
However, these classes of drugs should be avoided, or used cautiously, in patients with
bilateral renal artery stenotic lesions. The inhibition of angiotensin II may excessively reduce
intraglomerular pressure and filtration, and worsen renal function, in patients with bilateral
disease who already have compromised perfusion to both kidneys. In select patients with
RH (e.g., those with recent onset hypertension due to RH, those whose BP remains elevated
despite medical therapy, or those with progressive renal insufficiency due to renal artery ste-
nosis) percutaneous catheter interventions or surgical reconstruction of the stenosed vessel
may be more effective than continued medical antihypertensive therapy alone.

Mechanical Causes

Carctation of the Aorta
Coarctation is an infrequent congenital narrowing of the aorta typically located just distal to
the origin of the left subclavian artery (see Chapter 16). As a result of the relative obstruc-
tion to f ow, the BP in the aortic arch, head, and arms is higher than that in the descending
aorta and its branches and in the lower extremities. Sometimes the coarctation involves the
origin of the left subclavian artery, causing lower pressure in the left arm compared with
the right arm.

Hypertension in this condition arises by two mechanisms. First, reduced blood fow
to the kidneys stimulates the renin—angiotensin system, resulting in vasoconstriction (via
angiotensin II). Second, high pressures proximal to the coarctation stiffen the aortic arch
through medial hyperplasia and accelerated atherosclerosis, blunting the normal baroreceptor
response to elevated intravascular pressure.

Clinical clues to the presence of coarctation include symptoms of inadequate blood f ow
to the legs or left arm, such as claudication or fatigue, or the finding of weakened or absent
femoral pulses. A midsystolic murmur associated with the stenotic segment of the aorta
may be auscultated, especially over the back, between the scapulae. The chest radiograph
may show indentation of the aorta at the level of the coarctation. It may also demonstrate
a notched appearance of the ribs secondary to the enlargement of collateral intercostal
arteries, which shunt blood around the aortic narrowing. Treatment options include angio-
plasty or surgery to correct the stenosis. However, hypertension may not abate completely
after mechanical correction, in part because of persistent desensitization of the arterial
baroreceptors.

Fndocrine Causes
Circulating hormones play an important role in the control of normal BP, so it should not be
surprising that endocrine diseases may cause hypertension. When suspected, the presence of
such conditions is evaluated in four ways:
1. History of characteristic signs and symptoms
2. Measurement of hormone levels
3. Assessment of hormone secretion in response to stimulation or inhibition
4. Imaging studies to identify tumors secreting the excessive hormone
Hypertension 321
Pheochromocytoma

Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-secreting tumors of neuroendocrine cells (usually in
the adrenal medulla) that account for approximately 0.2% of cases of hypertension. The
release of epinephrine and norepinephrine by the tumor results in intermittent or chronic
vasoconstriction, tachycardia, and other sympathetic-mediated effects. A characteristic pre-
sentation consists of paroxysmal rises in BP accompanied by “autonomic attacks” caused by
the increased catecholamine levels: severe throbbing headaches, profuse sweating, palpita-
tions, and tachycardia. Although some patients are actually normotensive between attacks,
most have sustained hypertension. Ten percent of pheochromocytomas are malignant.

Determination of plasma catecholamine levels, or urine catecholamines and their metabo-
lites (e.g., vanillylmandelic acid and metanephrine), obtained under controlled circumstances,
are used to identify this condition. Because some pheochromocytomas secrete only episodi-
cally, diagnosis may require measurement of catecholamines immediately following an attack.

Pharmacologic therapy of pheochromocytomas includes the combination of an a-receptor
blocker (e.g., phenoxybenzamine) combined with a B-blocker. However, once the tumor is
localized by computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or angiography, the def nitive
therapy is surgical resection. For patients with inoperable disease, treatment consists of a- and
B-blockade as well as drugs that inhibit catecholamine biosynthesis (e.g., a-methyltyrosine).

Adrenocortical Hormone Excess
Among the hormones produced by the adrenal cortex are mineralocorticoids and glucocorti-
coids. Excess of either of these can result in hypertension.

Mineralocorticoids, primarily aldosterone, increase blood volume by stimulating reab-
sorption of sodium into the circulation by the distal portions of the nephron. This occurs in
exchange for potassium excretion into the urine, and the resulting hypokalemia is an impor-
tant marker of mineralocorticoid excess. Primary aldosteronism results either from an adrenal
adenoma (termed Conn syndrome) or from bilateral hyperplasia of the adrenal glands. While
once considered rare, recent data suggest that the frequency of primary aldosteronism may be
as high as 10% to 15% among hypertensives, depending on the sensitivity of screening, with
a substantial majority having the bilateral hyperplasia form. The diagnosis may be suspected
by the presence of hypokalemia and is conf rmed by the fnding of excessive plasma aldoste-
rone and a suppressed renin level. Therapy includes either surgical removal of the responsible
adenoma (if present) or medical management with aldosterone receptor antagonists.

Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA), an uncommon hereditary (autosomal
dominant) form of primary aldosteronism, results from a genetic rearrangement in which
aldosterone synthesis abnormally comes under the regulatory control of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH). This condition typically presents as severe hypertension in childhood or
young adulthood, as opposed to the more common forms of primary aldosteronism, which
are generally diagnosed in the third through sixth decades. Unlike other forms of hyperten-
sion, GRA-related BP elevation responds to glucocorticoid therapy, which suppresses ACTH
release from the pituitary gland.

Secondary aldosteronism can result from increased angiotensin II production stimulated by
rare renin-secreting tumors. More commonly, secondary elevation of aldosterone is a result of
augmented circulating angiotensin II in women taking oral contraceptives (which stimulate
hepatic production of angiotensinogen, as described earlier) or because of impaired angioten-
sin II degradation in chronic liver diseases.

Glucocorticoids, such as cortisol, elevate BP when present in excess amounts, likely via
blood volume expansion and stimulated synthesis of components of the renin—angiotensin
system. In addition, though mineralocorticoids are more potent activators of mineralocorti-
coid receptors in the renal tubules, excess glucocorticoids may also activate them.
322 chapter 13

Nearly 80% of patients with Cushing syndrome, a disorder of glucocorticoid excess,
have some degree of hypertension. These patients often present with classic “cushingoid”
features: a characteristic rounded facial appearance, central obesity, proximal muscle weak-
ness, and hirsutism. The cause of the excess glucocorticoids may be either a pituitary
ACTH-secreting adenoma, a peripheral ACTH-secreting tumor (either of which causes
adrenal cortical hyperplasia), or an adrenal cortisol-secreting adenoma. The diagnosis of
Cushing syndrome is confirmed by a 24-hour urine collection for the measurement of cor-
tisol, or by a dexamethasone test, which evaluates whether exogenous glucocorticoids can
suppress cortisol secretion.

Thyroid Hormone Abnormalities
Approximately one third of hyperthyroid and one fourth of hypothyroid patients have sig-
nificant hypertension. Thyroid hormones exert their cardiovascular effects by (1) inducing
sodium—potassium ATPases in the heart and vessels; (2) increasing blood volume; and (3)
stimulating tissue metabolism and oxygen demand, with secondary accumulation of metabo-
lites that modulate local vascular tone. Hyperthyroid patients develop hypertension through
cardiac hyperactivity with an increase in blood volume. Hypothyroid patients demonstrate
predominantly diastolic hypertension and an increase in peripheral vascular resistance.
Though the precise mechanism is unclear, the latter effect appears to be mediated by sympa-
thetic and adrenal activation in hypothyroidism.

CONSEQUENCES OF HYPERTENSION
Whatever the cause of BP elevation, the ultimate consequences are similar. High BP itself is
generally asymptomatic but can result in devastating effects on many organs.

Cinical Signs and Symptoms
In the past, “classic” symptoms of hypertension were considered to include headache, epi-
staxis (nose bleeds), and dizziness. However, the usefulness of these symptoms has been
called into question by studies that indicate that they are found no more frequently among
hypertensive patients than in the general population. Other symptoms, such as fushing,
sweating, and blurred vision, do seem more common in the hypertensive population. In gen-
eral, however, most hypertensive patients are asymptomatic and are diagnosed simply by BP
measurement during routine physical examinations.

Several physical signs of hypertension discussed in the following sections result directly from
elevated pressure, including LVH and retinopathy. In addition, hypertension complicated by
atherosclerosis can manifest by arterial bruits, particularly in the carotid and femoral arteries.

Organ Damage Caused by Hypertension
Target organ complications of hypertension ref ect the degree of chronic BP elevation. Such
organ damage can be attributed to (1) the increased workload of the heart and (2) arterial
damage resulting from the combined effects of the elevated pressure itself (weakened ves-
sel walls) and accelerated atherosclerosis (Fig. 13-7). Abnormalities of the vasculature that
result from elevated pressure include smooth muscle hypertrophy, endothelial cell dysfunc-
tion, and fatigue of elastic fibers. Chronic hypertensive trauma to the endothelium promotes
atherosclerosis possibly by disrupting normal protective mechanisms, such as the secretion of
nitric oxide. Arteries lined by atherosclerotic plaque may thrombose or may serve as a source
of cholesterol emboli that occlude distal vessels, causing organ infarction (such as cerebro-
vascular occlusion, resulting in stroke). In addition, atherosclerosis of large arteries hinders
Hypertension 323
= _
(Coronary) (Cerebral/carotid) (Aorta) (Cerebral (Kidney) (Eye)
| hemorrhage)

HGURE 13-7. Pathogenesis of the major consequences of arterial hypertension. LVH, left ventricular
hypertrophy.

their elasticity, resulting in systolic pressure spikes that can further traumatize endothelium

or provoke events such as aneurysm rupture.

The major target organs for the destructive complications of chronic hypertension are the
heart, the cerebrovascular system, the aorta and peripheral vascular system, the kidney, and
the retina (Table 13-3). Left untreated, approximately 50% of hypertensive patients die of
coronary artery disease or congestive heart failure, about 33% succumb to stroke, and 10%
to 15% die from complications of renal failure.

Heart
The major cardiac effects of hypertension relate to the increased afterload against which the
heart must contract and accelerated atherosclerosis within the coronary arteries.
TABLE 13-3
Organ System Manifestations
Heart ° Left ventricular hypertrophy
° Heart failure
* Myocardial ischemia and infarction
Cerebrovascular ° Stroke
Aorta and peripheral vascular * Aortic aneurysm and/or dissection
° Arteriosclerosis
Kidney * Nephrosclerosis
° Renal failure
Retina ° Arterial narrowing
* Hemorrhages, exudates, papilledema
OO ——eeeeeeee—“—™CC‘és
324 (chapter 13

Left Ventricular Hypertrophy and Diastolic Dysfunction
The high arterial pressure (heightened afterload) increases the wall tension of the left ven-
tricle, which compensates through hypertrophy. Concentric hypertrophy (without dilatation) is
the normal pattern of compensation, although conditions that elevate BP by virtue of increased
circulating volume (e.g., primary aldosteronism) may instead cause eccentric hypertrophy with
chamber dilatation (see Chapter 9). LVH results in increased stiffness of the left ventricle with
diastolic dysfunction, manifested by elevation of LV filling pressures that can result in pulmo-
nary congestion (i.e., heart failure with preserved ejection fraction—see Chapter 9).

Physical findings of LVH may include a heaving LV impulse on chest palpation, indicative
of the increased muscle mass. It is frequently accompanied by a fourth heart sound (Sy), as
the left atrium contracts into the stiffened left ventricle (see Chapter 2).

LVH is one of the strongest predictors of cardiac morbidity in hypertensive patients. The
degree of hypertrophy correlates with the development of congestive heart failure, angina,
arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death.

Systolic Dysfunction
Although LVH initially serves a compensatory role, later in the course of systemic hyperten-
sion, the increased LV mass may be insufficient to balance the high wall tension caused by
the elevated pressure. As LV contractile capacity deteriorates, findings of systolic dysfunction
become evident (1.e., reduced CO and pulmonary congestion). Systolic dysfunction is also
provoked by the accelerated development of coronary artery disease with resultant periods of
myocardial ischemia.

Qronary Artery Disease
Chronic hypertension is a major contributor to the development of myocardial ischemia and
infarction. These complications ref ect the combination of accelerated coronary atherosclero-
sis (decreased myocardial oxygen supply) and the high systolic workload (increased oxygen
demand). In addition, hypertensives have a higher incidence of postmyocardial infarction
complications such as rupture of the ventricular wall, LV aneurysm formation, and congestive
heart failure.

Cerebrovascular System
Hypertension is the major modifiable risk factor for strokes, also termed cerebrovascular
accidents (CVAs). Although diastolic pressure is important, it is the magnitude of the systolic
pressure that has been most closely linked to CVAs. The presence of isolated systolic hyper-
tension more than doubles a person’s risk for this complication.

Hypertension-induced strokes can be hemorrhagic or, more commonly, atherothrombotic.
Hemorrhagic CVAs result from rupture of microaneurysms induced in cerebral parenchymal
vessels by longstanding hypertension. Atherothrombotic (also called thromboembolic) CVAs
arise when portions of atherosclerotic plaque within the carotids or major cerebral arteries,
or thrombi that form on those plaques, break off, and embolize to smaller distal vessels.
Additionally, intracerebral vessels may be directly occluded by local atherosclerotic plaque
rupture and thrombosis.

Occlusion of small penetrating brain arteries can result in multiple tiny infarcts. As these
lesions soften and are absorbed by phagocytic cells, small (<3 mm diameter) cavities form,
termed lacunae. These lacunar infarctions are seen almost exclusively in patients with long-
standing hypertension and are usually localized to the penetrating branches of the middle and
posterior circulation of the brain.
Hypertension 325

In addition, the generalized arterial narrowing found in hypertensive patients reduces
collateral f ow to ischemic tissues and imposes structural requirements for higher perfusion
pressure to maintain adequate tissue fow. This leaves the hypertensive patient vulnerable
to cerebral infarcts in areas supplied by the distal ends of arterial branches (“watershed”
infarcts) if BP should fall suddenly.

Effective treatment of hypertension diminishes the risk of stroke and has contributed to a
50% reduction in deaths attributed to cerebrovascular events in recent decades.

Aorta and Peripheral Vasculature
The accelerated atherosclerosis associated with hypertension may result in plaque forma-
tion and narrowing throughout the arterial vasculature. In addition to the coronary arteries,
lesions most commonly appear within the aorta and the major arteries that serve the lower
extremities, neck, and brain.

Chronic hypertension may lead to the development of aneurysms, particularly of the
abdominal aorta. An abdominal aortic aneurysm represents prominent dilatation of the
vessel, usually located below the level of the renal arteries, contributed to by the mechani-
cal stress of the high pressure on an arterial wall already weakened by medial damage and
atherosclerosis (see Chapter 15). Aneurysms greater than 6 cm in diameter have a very high
likelihood of rupture within 2 years if not surgically corrected.

Another life-threatening vascular consequence of high BP is aortic dissection (see Chapter
15). Elevated BP, especially in the highest ranges, accelerates degenerative changes in the
media of the aorta. When the weakened wall is further exposed to high pressure, the intima
may tear, allowing blood to dissect into the aortic media and propagate in either direction
within the vessel wall, “clipping off’ and obstructing major branch vessels along the way
(including coronary or carotid arteries). The treatment of aortic dissection requires rigorous
BP control, and urgent surgical repair if the proximal aorta is involved.

Kidney

Hypertension-induced kidney disease (nephrosclerosis) is a leading cause of renal failure
that results from damage to the organ’s vasculature. Histologically, the vessel walls become
thickened with a hyaline infiltrate, known as hyaline arteriolosclerosis (Fig. 13-8). Greater
levels of hypertension can induce smooth muscle hypertrophy and necrosis of capillary walls,
termed fbrinoid necrosis. These changes result in reduced vascular supply and subsequent
ischemic atrophy of tubules and, to a lesser extent, glomeruli. Because intact nephrons can
usually compensate for those damaged by patchy ischemia, mild hypertension rarely leads to
renal insufficiency in the absence of other insults to the kidney. However, malignant levels of
hypertension can inf ict permanent damage leading to chronic renal failure.

One of the consequences of hypertensive renal failure is perpetuation of elevated BP. For
example, progressive renal dysfunction compromises the ability of the kidney to regulate
blood volume, which contributes further to chronic hypertension.

Retina
The retina is the only location where systemic arteries can be directly visualized by physical
examination. High BP induces abnormalities that are collectively termed hypertensive retinopa-
thy. Although vision may be compromised when the damage is extensive, more commonly the
changes serve as an asymptomatic clinical marker for the severity of hypertension and its duration.

Severe hypertension that is acute in onset (e.g., uncontrolled and/or malignant hyper-
tension) may burst small retinal vessels, causing hemorrhages, exudation of plasma lipids,
and areas of local infarction. If ischemia of the optic nerve develops, patients may describe
326 (chapter 13
: r ’ - . - » " = a? \~ = : - . ; " ~ ?
rn ~ > oe X, ™ rh. yA 7
| > ro a*~ A. ’ we * et Sot, A »> F os
’ yA pm . ; fey - S a ae \e fi yy! be M Keka G _s | ’
“fe ; . : at i » MES 4e \ Pb ee a > * ; “eo \# ’ ~~ *
; . , - . a : m : - al . :
‘ \ 7 : ’ . ._ ’ Lee = . ae 8 Ke , i. ~ Y "" = . a? ie a . 2 2
’ bf , vy > P 3 vm . “PD - > ° > a we . . , rag : 4 a4? >
"Oa . ¢ » Pe ‘ " Py Ie a >" r iG - en 4 : . . @ ary
tw! ' a i ee ee em D Smee Xs > LT ee ee et
cae Ni. sat ar eo Bed 7 ~~ ae oy mh Oe se 2 ' yp t
pa ; rr . Y : . ‘ " , - Lmtotys 82°: + ¢ a * 2 : f “ad : Ls iY '
“se: xy x ‘ . pete - : 8, f ¢ . ers rin “ J . f
at °- Ne . a, &, . . SC Pade ae $i ~ Vol A %e , *' : is, °
. .- . J4 »> , c : Ls 5 a > wer . he “ . ‘. ;
7 " '<~tl ~ : . . ‘. . . J os ~*~. ' y Pi .
WS re i f 7 , 7. oe ~~, ‘ ete | = ‘ ,
. > be “/ \~ _ aes - ” - he 7 ie \ NF] yy we ‘™ e,*
: > = ‘ ~% <y, . Cente? r /. = ri pS 4 a a ws h, = § j

7 "EX i* > a — 7 we . ae - | tee “ ts . 7 eas

Se ees | Cee *" sf ya we. a Ra”
\ , Me et ’ 4 . = S75 7 o - ¥, 5 re) Oy fi ro - — _ >

; + a Fe . As a A rel fu? a a - 7

"he . 4 : Sag hr P| _ _ (- ° few | . ; .

» a. —= fy . ? . <1 y.. me s . % | Y '
- ef > " _ : : 4 . “ 7 j p , (J > , a4 “ar cae: 4 \ Pi y

s ‘Vr kaa o , y > ’ (Ps Ty AFG | a Py int T .
ri ee et 7 ° ““ ( UM , Ly 7 Sol ee ™ tS oa . 4 4 4
cen) A. PAS Ce See ti Ot ahs
FIGURE 13-8. Hypertension-associated kidney injury. The arteriolar walls are thickened by hyaline inf Itrate
(short arrows). The glomeruli (long arrow) appear sclerosed because of reduced vascular supply. (QGourtesy of
Dr. Helmut G Rennke, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
generalized blurred vision. Retinal ischemia caused by hemorrhage leads to more patchy loss
of vision. Papilledema, or swelling of the optic disk with blurring of its margins, may arise
from high intracranial pressure when the BP reaches malignant levels and cerebrovascular
autoregulation begins to fail.

Chronically elevated BP results in a different set of retinal findings. Papilledema is absent,

but vasoconstriction results in arterial narrowing, and medial hypertrophy thickens the ves-
sel wall, which “nicks” (indents) crossing veins. With more severe chronic hypertension,
arterial sclerosis is evident as an increased ref ection of light through the ophthalmoscope
(termed “copper” or “silver” wiring). Although these changes are not in themselves of major
functional importance, they indicate that the patient has had long-standing, poorly controlled
hypertension.
A hypertensive crisis is a medical emergency characterized by a severe elevation of BP. In
the past, this type of elevation was usually a consequence of inadequate BP treatment. Now
a hypertensive crisis is more often caused by an acute hemodynamic insult (e.g., acute renal
disease) superimposed on a chronic hypertensive state. As a result of rapid pathologic changes
(fibrinoid necrosis) within the blood vessels and kidneys, a spiraling increase in BP evolves.
Further volume expansion and vasoconstriction occur as renal perfusion drops and serum
renin and angiotensin levels rise.

Severe BP elevation results in increased intracranial pressure, and patients may present
with hypertensive encephalopathy manifested by headache, blurred vision, confusion,
Hypertension 327
somnolence, and sometimes coma. When hypertension results in acute damage to retinal
vessels, accelerated-malignant hypertension is said to be present. Funduscopic examination
shows the effects of the rapid pressure rise as hemorrhages, exudates, and sometimes pap-
illedema, as described earlier. The increased load on the left ventricle during a hypertensive
crisis may precipitate angina (because of increased myocardial oxygen demand) or pulmo-
nary edema.

A hypertensive crisis requires rapid therapy to prevent permanent vascular complications.
Correction of BP is generally followed by reversal of the acute pathologic changes, including
papilledema and retinal exudation, although renal damage often persists.

TREATMENT OF HYPERTENSION
The therapeutic approach to the hypertensive patient should be infuenced by two consider-
ations. First, a single elevated BP measurement does not establish the diagnosis of hypertension
because BP varies considerably from day to day. Moreover, BP measurement in the hospital or
doctor’s office may be affected by the “white coat” effect resulting from patient anxiety. The
average of multiple readings taken at two or three office visits and/or in the home provides a
more reliable basis for labeling a patient as hypertensive. There is also evidence that automatic
ambulatory BP measurements, taken over the course of 24 hours while the patient follows a daily
routine, are more predictive of cardiovascular mortality than traditional in-clinic measurements.

Second, although even mild hypertension is a major public health problem because of its
high prevalence, for the person with stage | hypertension, the risks are small. For example,
the additional risk of a stroke is approximately | in 850 per year. Hence, observation over time
to determine whether the low-level hypertension persists, or whether lifestyle changes can
reduce the pressure, is often a recommended alternative to immediate drug therapy. This is
especially true in the absence of other cardiovascular risk factors such as smoking, diabetes,
or high serum cholesterol. However, for patients with established cardiovascular disease or
for those who have other major atherosclerotic risk factors, a more aggressive approach to
pharmacologic therapy is usually warranted to reduce the risk burden.

For most hypertensive patients, drug therapy is ultimately the most effective way to pre-
vent future complications, but that should not deter consideration of other beneficial lifestyle
changes.

Nonpharmacologic Treatment
Certain lifestyle modifications have been shown to be effective in lowering BP and should be
considered in the treatment plan for any patient with hypertension.

Weight Reduction
Studies have consistently found obesity and hypertension to be highly correlated, especially
when the obesity is of a central (abdominal) distribution. BP reduction follows weight loss
in a large portion of hypertensive patients who are more than 10% above their ideal weights.
Each 10 kg of weight loss is associated with a 5 to 20 mm Hg fall in systolic BP.

Exercise
Sedentary normotensive people have a 20% to 50% higher risk of developing hypertension than
do their more active peers. Regular aerobic exercise, such as walking, jogging, or bicycling, has
been shown to contribute to BP reduction over and above any resulting weight loss. A hyper-
tensive patient who becomes physically conditioned manifests a lower resting HR and reduced
levels of circulating catecholamines than before training, suggesting a fall in sympathetic tone.
328 chapter 13

Diet
In addition to caloric restriction for weight loss, changes in the composition ofa patient’s diet
may be important for BP reduction. For example, a diet high in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat
dairy products has been shown to signif cantly reduce BP.

Sodium
Salt restriction for people with high BP is a controversial issue, but there are several epidemiologic
and clinical trials that support the benef t of moderating sodium intake. In normotensive persons,
excess salt ingestion is simply excreted by the kidneys, but approximately 50% of patients with EH
are found to have BPs that vary with sodium intake, suggesting a defect in natriuresis. Sensitivity
to sodium levels is more common in African American and elderly hypertensive patients. Because
low-salt diets tend to increase the effectiveness of antihypertensive medications in general, the
current recommendation is to limit salt intake to less than 6 g of sodium chloride (less than 2.3 g
sodium) per day, which is one third less than the average United States consumption.

Potassium
Total body potassium content tends to decrease when a person eats a diet low in fruits and
vegetables or takes potassium-wasting diuretics. Potassium def ciency has several theoretical
effects that may raise BP and contribute to adverse cardiovascular outcomes, such that dietary
supplements are routinely recommended to help replete low serum K* levels. There is no
convincing evidence that prescribing potassium supplements to a normokalemic hypertensive
patient will lower BP.

Alcohol
The chronic excessive intake of alcoholic beverages correlates with high BP and resistance
to antihypertensive medications. Moreover, experimental evidence shows that BP (especially
systolic) may rise acutely following alcohol consumption. The reason for this link remains
incompletely understood, but decreasing chronic alcohol intake has been shown to lower BP.

Other
Low calcium intake and magnesium depletion have been associated with elevated BP, but
the responsible mechanisms and the implications for therapy are unclear. Caffeine ingestion
transiently increases BP (as much as 5 to 15 mm Hg after two cups of coffee), but routine use
does not seem to produce chronic pressure elevation.

Smoking @ssation
Cigarette smoking transiently increases BP, likely because of the effect of nicotine on auto-
nomic ganglia, and is a risk factor for the development of sustained hypertension. In addition,
the atherogenic effect of smoking may contribute to the development of RH. Cigarette usage
is associated with many other health hazards, and all patients should be discouraged from
smoking.

Relaxation Therapy
BP frequently rises under conditions of stress. In addition, essential hypertensive patients
and their relatives often show higher-than-normal basal sympathetic tone and exaggerated
autonomic responses to mental stress. Hence, relaxation techniques have been advocated as
Hypertension 329
Drug Cass Examples (See Chapter 17) Physiologic Action
Diuretics Thiazides 1 Greulating volume
Potassium-sparing diuretics
Loop diuretics
Sympatholytics B-Blockers | Heart rate, cardiac contractility,
and renin secretion
Q@mbined a- and B-blockers Same as f-blocker plus vascular
smooth muscle relaxation
Central a,-agonists | Sympathetic tone
Peripheral o,-antagonists Vascular smooth muscle relaxation
Vasodilators Glcium channel blockers J Peripheral vascular resistance
Direct vasodilators (e.g., hydralazine, minoxidil)
Renin—angiotensin— Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors \ Peripheral vascular resistance and
aldosterone system Angiotensin I receptor blockers | Sodium retention
antagonists Direct renin inhibitors
SS
a method to control hypertension. Available methods include biofeedback and meditation.
The effectiveness of such therapy has not been consistently demonstrated in clinical trials and
seems to depend on the patient’s attitude and long-term compliance.

In summary, nonpharmacologic therapy offers a wide range of options that do not have the
expense and potential side effects of prescribed drug use. The effectiveness of these therapies
should come as no surprise, given the extent to which environmental factors play a role in
hypertension. Therefore, behavior-based interventions are recommended as frst-line therapy
in any patient whose hypertension is not an immediate danger.

Pharmacologic Treatment

Antihypertensive medications are the standard means to lower chronically elevated BP and
are indicated if nonpharmacologic treatment proves inadequate. More than 100 drug prepara-
tions are available to treat hypertension, but fortunately the most commonly used medica-
tions fall into four classes: diuretics, sympatholytics, vasodilators, and drugs that interfere
with the renin—angiotensin system (Table 13-4). The individual actions of these groups on the
physiologic abnormalities in hypertension are shown in Figure 13-9. The pharmacology and
use of antihypertensive drugs are described in greater detail in Chapter 17.

Diuretics have been in use for many decades to treat hypertension. They reduce circula-
tory volume, CO, and mean arterial pressure, and are most effective in patients with mild-
to-moderate hypertension who have normal renal function. They are especially effective in
African American or elderly persons, who tend to be salt sensitive. In clinical trials, diuret-
ics have reduced the risk of strokes and cardiovascular events in hypertensive patients and
are inexpensive compared with other agents. Thiazide diuretics (e.g., hydrochlorothiazide)
and potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone) promote Na* excretion in the distal
nephron (see Chapter 17). Loop diuretics (e.g., furosemide) are generally too potent and
their actions too short-lived for use as antihypertensive agents; however, they are useful in
lowering BP in patients with renal insuff ciency, who often do not respond to other diuretics.

Thiazides, the most commonly used diuretics in hypertension, may result in adverse meta-
bolic side effects, including elevation of serum glucose, cholesterol, and triglyceride levels. In
addition, hypokalemia, hyperuricemia, and decreased sexual function are potential side effects.
330 chapter 13
[_Biood Pressure_]
vas odila tors
* B-Blockers
* Some CCB * RAS blockers * a,-Blockers
* a ,-Blockers * Central a,-agonists
* Central a5-agonists
¢ B-Blockers
* CCB
¢ Diuretics * RAS blockers
* RAS blockers *CCB
* a,-Blockers
FIGURE 13-9. Physiologic effects of antihypertensive medications. Notice that some antihypertensive
medications work at multiple sites. CCB, calcium channel blockers; HR, heart rate; RAS blockers, renin—
angiotensin system blockers (i.e., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor
blockers); SV stroke volume.
However, when diuretics are prescribed in low dosages, it is often possible to accrue the
desired antihypertensive effect while minimizing adverse complications.

Sympatholytic agents include (1) B-blockers, (2) central a-adrenergic agonists, and (3)
systemic o-adrenergic-blocking drugs. B-Blockers are believed to lower BP through several
mechanisms, including (1) reducing CO through a decrease in HR and a mild decline in
contractility and (2) decreasing the secretion of renin (and therefore levels of angiotensin II),
which leads to a reduction in TPR. B-Blockers are less effective than diuretics in elderly and
African American hypertensive patients. Adverse effects of B-blockers include bronchospasm
(because of bronchiolar f,-receptor blockade), fatigue, impotence, and hyperglycemia. They
may also adversely alter lipid metabolism. Most B-blockers cause an increase in serum triglyc-
eride levels and a decrease in “good” HDL cholesterol levels. However, B-blockers with intrin-
sic sympathomimetic activity (see Chapter 17) or those with combined a- and B-blocking
properties (such as labetalol) do not adversely affect HDL levels.

Centrally acting a,-adrenergic agonists, such as methyldopa and clonidine, reduce sym-
pathetic outf ow to the heart, blood vessels, and kidneys. These are now rarely used owing to
their high frequency of side effects (e.g., dry mouth, sedation). Systemic a,-antagonists, such
as prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin, cause a decrease in TPR through relaxation of vascular
smooth muscle. They may be useful for hypertension in some older men because the drugs
also improve symptoms of prostatic enlargement. However, they are otherwise not often rec-
ommended for treatment of hypertension because a major clinical trial showed that diuretic
therapy is superior to an a,-antagonist in the prevention of adverse cardiovascular events.

Peripheral vasodilators include calcium channel blockers, hydralazine, and minoxidil.
Calcium channel blockers reduce the infux of Ca** responsible for cardiac and vascular
smooth muscle contraction, thus reducing cardiac contractility and TPR (see Chapter 17).
Clinical trials in patients with hypertension have shown that calctum channel blockers reduce
the risk of myocardial infarction and stroke. Thus, long-acting (i.e., sustained-release drugs
taken once a day) members of this group are frequently used to treat hypertension. Shorter-
acting calcium channel blocker preparations are not used for this purpose; they are less conve-
nient and have actually been associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes (see Chapter 6).
Hypertension 331

Hydralazine and minoxidil lower BP by directly relaxing vascular smooth muscle of
precapillary resistance vessels. However, the resultant vasodilatation can result in a ref ex
increase in HR, so that combined B-blocker therapy is frequently necessary. The use of these
direct vasodilators in treating hypertension has waned with the advent of newer agents with
fewer side effects.

Drugs that interfere with the renin—angiotensin—aldosterone system include ACE inhibi-
tors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and direct renin inhibitors. ACE inhibitors decrease BP
by blocking the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II (see Fig. 17-6), thereby reducing
the vasopressor effect of angiotensin II and the secretion of aldosterone. As a result, periph-
eral vascular resistance falls and sodium retention by the kidney declines. An additional
antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors occurs via an increase in the concentration of the cir-
culating vasodilator bradykinin (see Fig. 17-6). ACE inhibitors are important drugs that have
been shown to reduce mortality rates in patients following an acute myocardial infarction, in
patients with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (see Chapter 9), and even in
people at high risk for developing cardiovascular disease. The drugs also slow the deteriora-
tion of renal function in patients with diabetic nephropathy. The most common side effect of
ACE inhibitors is the development of a reversible dry cough (likely related to the increased
bradykinin effect); hyperkalemia and azotemia may also occur, as described in Chapter 17.

Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) block the binding of angiotensin II to its recep-
tors (1.e., subtype AT, receptors) in blood vessels and other targets (see Fig. 17-6). By inhibit-
ing the effects of angiotensin II (and thereby causing vasodilatation and reduced secretion of
aldosterone), BP falls. In clinical trials, the antihypertensive efficacy of this group is similar to
that of ACE inhibitors. They are very well-tolerated drugs, and unlike ACE inhibitors, cough is
not a common side effect. Like ACE inhibitors, ARBs have been shown to reduce cardiovascu-
lar event rates (including myocardial infarction and stroke) in high-risk patients.

The oral direct renin inhibitor aliskiren reduces levels of angiotensin I and angiotensin
II by binding to the proteolytic site of renin, thus inhibiting cleavage of angiotensinogen.
Antihypertensive effectiveness is no greater than that of other drugs that inhibit the renin—
angiotensin—aldosterone axis and long-term effects on cardiovascular event rates are not yet
known.

Given the large number of effective antihypertensive medications that are available, the
choice of which drug to use as initial therapy in an individual patient can seem daunt-
ing. Besides the exceptions noted above, clinical trial data reveal little difference between
antihypertensive agents on cardiovascular outcomes in the average hypertensive subject
as long as equivalent decreases in BP are achieved. As of this writing, national guidelines
recommend the use of either a thiazide diuretic, calcium channel blocker, ACE inhibitor, or
an ARB as equally effective first-line treatment options for EH. Thiazide diuretics remain
among the most popular choices by health care providers because of long-proven benefits
and low cost. In certain circumstances, or if initial therapy with a single agent is not suf-
ficient, another type of antihypertensive should be substituted or added (Table 13-5). For
example, an ACE inhibitor would be given prime consideration in patients with hyperten-
sion who also have chronic heart failure, diabetes, or LV dysfunction following myocardial
infarction. A B-blocker would be an appropriate choice in a patient with concurrent isch-
emic heart disease.

There are some other guiding principles. First, the chosen drug regimen should conform to
the patient’s specific needs. For example, an anxious young patient in the throes of the hyper-
kinetic phase of EH might be treated with a B-blocker, whereas a more effective choice for the
same patient many years later, after the pressure becomes more dependent on peripheral vas-
cular resistance, could be a vasodilator (e.g., long-acting calctum channel blocker). Because
therapy is likely to continue for many years, consideration of adverse effects and impact of
drug therapy on the patient’s quality of life are very important.
332 chapter 13
TABLE 13-5
Qncurrent Q@ndition Initial Therapy Drug Casses
Heart failure Diuretics
B-Blockers
ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor blockers
Aldosterone antagonists (e.g., spironolactone—see Chapter 9)
Postmyocardial infarction B-Blockers
ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor blockers
Aldosterone antagonists
Diabetes ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor blockers
Qilcium channel blockers
Chronic kidney disease ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor blockers

OO ———eeeeeeeerere—“C™C*

AG, angiotensin-converting enzyme.

Another principle of antihypertensive drug therapy concerns the use of multiple agents. The
effects of one drug, acting at one physiologic control point, can be defeated by natural compen-
satory mechanisms. For example, the drop in renal perfusion by a direct vasodilator can acti-
vate the renin—angiotensin system, prompting the kidney to retain volume, thereby blunting
the antihypertensive benef t. Combination drug therapy is aimed at preventing such an action
by using agents acting at different complementary sites. In this example, a direct vasodilator is
often paired with a low-dose diuretic to avoid the undesired volume expansion effect.

In conclusion, hypertension emerges as a tremendously important clinical problem because
of its prevalence and potentially devastating consequences. The evaluation and treatment of
a patient with hypertension require methodical consideration of the ways in which normal
cardiovascular physiology may have gone awry. Because most patients still fall into the idio-
pathic category of EH, there is still much room for creative thought and research in this area.
° Hypertension is def ned as a chronic diastolic BP > 90 mm Hg and/or systolic BP >

140 mm Hg.

° Those with prehypertension (systolic 120 to 139 mm Hg or diastolic 80 to 99 mm Hg) have
an increased risk of developing def nite hypertension over time.

e Hypertension is of unknown etiology in the vast majority of patients (termed EH), and is a
diagnosis of exclusion.

e Secondary hypertension may arise from: (1) renal abnormalities (e.g., renal parenchymal
disease and renal artery stenosis); (2) coarctation of the aorta; and (3) endocrine abnormali-
ties (e.g., pheochromocytoma, primary or secondary aldosteronism, Cushing syndrome, and
thyroid abnormalities).

° Most hypertensive patients remain asymptomatic until complications arise.

° Potential complications include stroke, myocardial infarction, heart failure, aortic aneurysm
and dissection, renal damage, and retinopathy.

° Treatment of hypertension includes lifestyle and dietary improvements and pharmacologic
therapy.

e The most commonly recommended antihypertensive drugs include diuretics, ACE, angioten-
sin receptor blockers, long-acting calcium channel blockers, and sometimes f-blockers.
Hypertension 333
Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Christopher T. Lee, MD; Payman
Zamani, MD; Rajeev Malhotra, MD; Rahul Deshmukh, MD; Allison McDonough, MD;
Rajesh S. Magrulkar, MD; Peter A. Nigrovic, MD; and Thomas J. Moore, MD.
Additional Reading
Cooper CJ, Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, et al. Stenting and medical James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. Evidence-based guideline
therapy for atherosclerotic renal-artery stenosis. N Engl J for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report
Med. 2014;370:13-22. from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint
Franceschini N, Reiner AP, Heiss G. Recent f ndings in the National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507-520.
genetics of blood pressure and hypertension traits. Am J Raman SV. The hypertensive heart: an integrated understand-
Hypertens. 2011;24:392—-400. ing informed by imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:91—96.
Go AS, Bauman MA, Coleman King SM, et al. An effective Weber MA, Schiffrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical prac-
approach to high blood pressure control: a science advisory tice guidelines for the management of hypertension in
from the American Heart Association, the American College the community: a statement by the American Society of
of Cardiology, and the Centers for Disease Control and Hypertension and the International Society of Hypertension.
Prevention. Hypertension. 2014;63:878-885. J Clin Hypertension. 2014;16:14—26.
.
+ i ‘w
e
Diseases of the /
° ° +.
Pericardium |.
D) ome
Leonard S. Lilly
. —-
Chapter Outline D iseases of the pericardium form a spectrum that ranges
/ from benign, self-limited pericarditis to life-threatening
oes “eee cardiac tamponade. The clinical manifestations of these dis-
ute Pericarditis ; ;
Biology orders and approaches to their management can be predicted
Pathology from an understanding of pericardial anatomy and pathophys-
Cinical Features iology, as presented in this chapter.
Diagnostic Studies
Treatment
Pericardial Effusion ANATOMY AND FUNCITON
—— ‘ol The pericardium is a two-layered sac that encircles the
on oy _ sy heart. The inner serosal layer (visceral pericardium) adheres
Dione Sua to the outer wall of the heart and is reflected back on itself,
a a at the level of the great vessels, to line the tough f brous
a outer layer (parietal pericardium). A thin flm of pericar-
Path. . ‘ol friction between them.
7 a vo ob The pericardium appears to serve three functions: (1) it
— — f xes the heart within the mediastinum and limits its motion,
fee ges (2) it prevents extreme dilatation of the heart during sud-
@ hectae Pe ‘carditi den rises of intracardiac volume, and (3) it may function
a 4 Path _ . as a barrier to limit the spread of infection from the adja-
marhole AM eA sone cent lungs. However, patients with complete absence of the
i OBy pericardium (either congenitally or after surgical removal)
Pathophysiology
Cini 7 are generally asymptomatic, casting doubt on its actual
—— importance in normal physiology. Yet like the unnecessary
appendix, the pericardium can become diseased and cause
great harm.
334
