- + bs
bo a Yq
2 Mes
e
Mechanisms of |. §
° ° » for
Cardiac Arrhythmias | | |
—_
Morgan J. Prust
William G. Stevenson
Gary R. Strichartz - )
Leonard S. Lilly 3am
Chapter Outline N ormal cardiac function relies on the flow of electric impulses
—===——— = through the heart in an exquisitely coordinated fashion.
Normal Imp ulse Formation Abnormalities of the electric rhythm are known as arrhythmias
Ionic Basis of Automaticity ;
Native and Latent Pacemakers (also termed dysrhythmias) and are among the most common
Overdrive Suppression clinical problems encountered. The presentations of arrhyth-
Hectrotonic Interactions mias range from common benign palpitations to severe symp-
Altered Impulse Formation toms of low cardiac output and death. Therefore, a thorough
Alterations in Sinus Node understanding of these disorders is important to the daily
Se practice of medicine. |
Eahoncodatavomasioinnot Abnormally slow heart rhythms are termed bradycardias
parent Pacoieere (or bradyarrhythmias). Fast rhythms are known as tachycar-
Abnormal Automaticity dias (or tachyarrhythmias). Tachycardias are further char-
Triggered Activity acterized as supraventricular when they involve the atrium
a cles. This chapter extends the description of basic cardiac
Physiologic Basis of Antiarrhythmic electrophysiology presented in Chapter 1 and explains the
Therapy mechanisms by which arrhythmias develop, followed by a
Bradyarrhythmias general approach to their management. Chapter 12 describes
Tachyarrhythmias specifc rhythm disorders, including how to recognize and
treat them.

Dsorders of heart rhythm result from alterations of
impulse formation, impulse conduction, or both. The chap-
ter frst addresses how abnormalities of impulse formation

268
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 269
the electrical activity rapidly propagates from one cell to the next with minimal resistance, spreading through
a large mass of tissue. As a result, the leading edge of a depolarization may be located several centimeters
ahead of its trailing edge, and this property plays an important role in the genesis of certain arrhythmias, as
will be described.

NORMAL IMPULSE FORMATION
As described in Chapter 1, electric impulse formation in the heart arises from the intrinsic
automaticity of specialized cardiac cells. Automaticity refers to a cell’s ability to sponta-
neously depolarize to a threshold voltage to generate an action potential. Although atrial
and ventricular myocytes do not have this property under normal conditions, the cells of
the specialized conducting system do possess natural automaticity and are therefore termed
pacemaker cells. The specialized conducting system includes the sinoatrial (SA) node, the
AV nodal region, and the ventricular conducting system. The latter is composed of the bundle
of His, the bundle branches, and the Purkinje fibers. In pathologic situations, myocardial cells
outside the conducting system may also acquire automaticity.

Tonic Basis of Automaticity
Cells with natural automaticity do not have a static resting voltage. Rather, they inherently
display gradual depolarization during phase 4 of the action potential (Fig. 11-2). If this spon-
taneous diastolic depolarization reaches the threshold condition, an action potential upstroke
is generated. An important ionic current largely responsible for phase 4 spontaneous depo-
larization is known as the pacemaker current (I,). The channels that carry this current are
activated by hyperpolarization (increasingly negative voltages) and mainly conduct sodium
ions. I; channels begin to open when the membrane voltage becomes more negative than
approximately —50 mV and are different entities than the fast sodium channels responsible
for rapid phase 0 depolarization in ventricular and atrial myocytes. The inward fow of Na*
through these slow channels, driven by its concentration gradient and the negative intracel-
lular potential, depolarizes the membrane toward threshold.

[Trchyarriythimias (increased fring rate)
[ Brmayarntythimins (decreased fring rate)

HGURE11-1. Arrhythmias result from alterations in impulse formation and/or impulse conduction.
Tachyarrhythmias result from enhanced automaticity, unidirectional block with reentry, or triggered activity.
Bradyarrhythmias result from decreased automaticity or conduction block. SA, sinoatrial.
270 (chapter 11
Cat+ Kt
0 influx efflux
\ J HGURE11-2. The action potential (AP) of
> Ip a pacemaker cell (e.g., the sinus node). The
= -20 influx slow phase 4 depolarization is largely caused
o by the I; (pacemaker) inward current, which
> 40 beeeee-JeeceeQeceeee \ _f...--\.-. Tp drives the cell to threshold (approximately —40
5 mV). The upstroke of the AP is caused by the
> slow inward current of Ga** ions. Reduction
0 a Sone cece eee ee he MOP of the G** current (due to inactivation of
——— calcium channels) and progressive K’ eff ux
Phase 4 through voltage-gated potassium channels are
depolarization responsible for repolarization. MDP, maximum
negative diastolic potential; TP, threshold
Time potential.
In the pacemaker cells of the SA node, three other ionic currents also contribute to phase
4 gradual depolarization: (1) a slowly increasing inward calcium current, carried mostly by
L-type Ca** channels that become activated at voltages reached near the end of phase 4;
(2) a progressively declining outward potassium current; and (3) an additional inward sodium
current mediated by activation of the electrogenic sodium-—calcium exchanger by calcium
release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
When the membrane potential of a pacemaker cell reaches the threshold condition, the
upstroke of the action potential is generated. In contrast to the phase 0 upstroke of cells in the
Purkinje system, that of cells in the sinus and AV nodes is much slower (see Fig. 11-2). The rea-
son for the difference is that the membrane potential determines the proportion of fast sodium
channels that are in a resting state capable of depolarization, compared with an inactivated
state. The number of available (or resting-state) fast sodium channels decreases as the resting
(diastolic) membrane potential becomes less negative. Because sinus and AV nodal cells have
less negative maximum diastolic membrane voltages (~50 to —60 mV) than do Purkinje cells
(90 mV), the large majority of fast sodium channels is inactivated in these pacemaker cells.
Thus, the action potential upstroke relies to a great extent on a smaller calcium current (through
the relatively slower opening of L-type Ca** channels) and has a less rapid rate of rise than
do cells of the Purkinje system or ventricular myocardium. The repolarization phase of pace-
maker cells results from both the inactivation of the open calcium channels and the opening of
voltage-gated potassium channels that permit eff ux of potassium from the cells (see Fig. 11-2).
Native and Latent Pacemakers
The distinct populations of automatic cells in the specialized conduction pathway have dif-
ferent intrinsic rates of firing. These rates are determined by three variables that inf uence
how fast the membrane potential reaches the threshold condition: (1) the rate (1.e., the slope)
of phase 4 spontaneous depolarization, (2) the maximum negative diastolic potential, and
(3) the threshold potential. A more negative maximum diastolic potential, or a less negative
threshold potential, slows the rate of impulse initiation because it takes longer to reach the
threshold value (Fig. 11-3). Conversely, the greater the I;, the steeper the slope of phase 4 and
the faster the cell depolarizes. The size of I; depends on the number and opening kinetics of
the individual pacemaker channels through which this current f ows.
Since all healthy myocardial cells are electrically connected by gap junctions, an action
potential generated in one part of the myocardium will ultimately spread to all other regions.
When an impulse arrives at a cell that is not yet close to threshold, current from the depolarized
cell will bring the adjacent cell’s membrane potential to the threshold level so that it will fire
(regardless of how close its intrinsic I; has brought it to threshold). Thus, the pacemaker cells
with the fastest rate of depolarization set the heart rate. In the normal heart, the dominant
CM channisms of Cardiac Amhythmias 271
a bc
>
E
& i
& -40 |------, gt p/-=-4----- TP
~60 STreeeyee eh eee eee ee MDP
Phase 4
FIGURE 11-3. Determinants of cell f ring 8 baiineroeanne nes MOE RAGING MOP
rates. A. Alterations in the pacemaker current a Time
(I;) and in the magnitude of the maximum
diastolic potential (MDP) alter the cell fring
rate. (a) The normal action potential (AP) of a 4
a pacemaker cell. (b) Reduced I; renders the
slope of phase 4 less steep; thus, the time
required to reach threshold potential (TP) =
is increased. (c) The MDP is more negative; =
therefore, the time required to reach TP is @ ~30}-------- --4---------- Less negative TP
increased. B Alterations in TP change the £ -40 ph ---+----- Tp
fring rate of the cell. G@mpared with the S
normal TP (a), the TP in b is less negative; Mit eaaeeacaeeeeeaeene ane
thus, the duration of time to achieve
threshold is increased, and the fring rate
decreases. B Time
pacemaker is the sinoatrial node, which at rest initiates impulses at a rate of 60 to 100 bpm.
Because the sinus node rate is faster than that of the other tissues that possess automaticity,
its repeated discharges prevent spontaneous firing of other potential pacemaker sites.
The SA node is known as the native pacemaker because it normally sets the heart rate.
Other cells within the specialized conduction system harbor the potential to act as pacemakers
if necessary and are therefore called latent pacemakers (or ectopic pacemakers). In contrast
to the SA node, the AV node and the bundle of His have intrinsic firing rates of 50 to 60 bpm,
and cells of the Purkinje system have rates of approximately 30 to 40 bpm. These latent sites
may initiate impulses and take over the pacemaker function if the SA node slows or fails to fire
or if conduction abnormalities block the normal wave of depolarization from reaching them.
Overdrive Suppression:
Not only does the cell population with the fastest intrinsic rhythm preempt all other automatic cells
from spontaneously firing but it also directly suppresses their automaticity. This phenomenon is
called overdrive suppression. Cells maintain their transsarcolemmal ion distributions because of
the continuously active Na*K*-ATPase that extrudes three Na* ions from the cell in exchange for
two K* ions transported in (Fig. 11-4). Because its net transport effect is one positive charge in the
outward direction, Na*K*-ATPase creates a hyperpolarizing current (i.e., it tends to make the inside
of the cell more negative). As the cell potential becomes increasingly negative, additional time is
required for spontaneous phase 4 depolarization to reach the threshold voltage (see Fig. 11-3A),
and therefore, the rate of spontaneous firing is decreased. Although the hyperpolarizing current
moves the membrane voltage away from threshold, pacemaker cells firing at their own intrinsic
rate have an I; current sufficiently large to overcome this hyperpolarizing inf uence (see Fig. 11-4).
The hyperpolarizing current increases when a cell is caused to fire more frequently than its
intrinsic pacemaker rate. The more often the cell is depolarized, the greater the quantity of Na* ions
that enter the cell per unit time. As a result of the increased intracellular Na* content, Na*K*-ATPase
becomes more active, thereby tending to restore the normal transmembrane Na* gradient. This
272 (chapter 11
increased pump activity provides a larger hyperpo-
larizing current, opposing the depolarizing current],  4yperpolarizing 2 K+
and further decreases the rate of spontaneous depo- net current 3 Nat
larization. Thus, overdrive suppression decreases a
cell’s automaticity when that cell is driven to depo- Depolarizing | ches
larize faster than its intrinsic discharge rate. current f =e
Hectrotonic Interactions FIGURE 11-4. Gmpetition between the
In addition to overdrive suppression, anatomiccon- 4¢polarizing pacemaker current (1,) and Na" K’-
‘ AJPase, which produces a hyperpolarizing
nections between pacemaker and nonpacemaker a 2.

ll . tant in det _ h dj t current. Na*K'-AlPase transports three Na* ions
Cems ate MAporan! i Cererm ining 10W a Jacen outside the cell in exchange for two K' ions
cells suppress latent pacemaker foci. Myocardial transported inward. The hyperpolarizing current
cells in the ventricle and Purkinje system repolar- acts to suppress automaticity by antagonizing
ize to a resting potential of approximately —90 mV, __ I; and contributes to overdrive suppression in
whereas pacemaker cells in the sinus and AVnodes cells that are stimulated more rapidly than their
repolarize toa maximum diastolic potentialofabout Mttinsic fring rate.

—60 mV. When these two cell types are adjacent to
one another, they are electrically coupled through low-resistance gap junctions concentrated
in their intercalated discs. This coupling results in a compromise of electric potentials owing
to electrotonic current fow between the cells, causing relative hyperpolarization of the pace-
maker cell and relative depolarization of the nonpacemaker cell (Fig. 11-5). Hyperpolarization
Myocardial cell Pacemaker cell Pacemaker action potential
RP =—90 mV MDP =-—60 mV
TP
MDP
Ip
Time
A
Tends to Tends to
depolarize hyperpolarize
(less negative (more negative
voltage) voltage) TP
Intercellular urre nt { MDP
Ip

B Time
HGURE11-5. Hectrotonic interaction between pacemaker (e.g., AVnodal) and nonpacemaker (myocardial)
cells. A. Pacemaker cells that are not coupled to myocardial cells have a maximum diastolic potential (MDP) of
approximately —60 mV whereas myocardial cells have a resting potential (RP) of approximately -90 mV
B Ween pacemaker cells and myocytes are neighbors, they may be connected electrically by gap junctions at
their intercalated discs (e.g., at the AVnode). In this situation, electric current flows between the pacemaker cell
and the myocardial cell, tending to hyperpolarize the former and depolarize the latter, driving their membrane
potentials closer to one another. The hyperpolarizing current renders the MDP more negative, causing it to take
longer for spontaneous depolarization to reach the threshold value, thereby suppressing automaticity. If a disease
state impairs coupling between cells, the influence of surrounding myocytes on the pacemaker cell is reduced,
allowing I; to depolarize to threshold more readily and enhancing automaticity. TP, threshold potential.
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 273
moves the diastolic potential further from threshold and thus slows the heart rate (as shown in
Fig. 11-3A). Electrotonic effects may be particularly important in suppressing automaticity in
the AV node (via connections between atrial myocytes and AV nodal cells) and in the distal
Purkinje fibers (which are coupled to ventricular myocardial cells). In contrast, cells in the
center of the SA node are less tightly coupled to atrial myocytes; thus, their automaticity is less
subject to electrotonic interactions.

Decoupling of normally suppressed cells, such as those in the AV node (e.g., by ischemic
damage), may reduce the inhibitory electrotonic inf uence and enhance automaticity, produc-
ing ectopic rhythms by the latent pacemaker tissue.

Arrhythmias may arise from altered impulse formation at the SA node or from other sites,
including the specialized conduction pathways or regions of cardiac muscle. The main abnor-
malities of impulse initiation that lead to arrhythmias are (1) altered automaticity (of the
sinus node or latent pacemakers within the specialized conduction pathway), (2) abnormal
automaticity in atrial or ventricular myocytes, and (3) triggered activity.

Alterations in Sinus Node Automaticity
The rate of impulse initiation by the sinus node,
as well as by the latent pacemakers ofthe special- 2
ized conducting system, is regulated primarily by 8
neurohumoral factors. oS

2 Cc
Increased Sinus Node Automatici S
city “ Cholinergic Sympathetic

The most important modulator of normal sinus 2 | Stimulation stimulation
node automaticity is the autonomic nervous sys- ‘6
tem. Sympathetic stimulation, acting through 2
B,-adrenergic receptors, increases the open prob- &
ability of the pacemaker channels (Fig. 11-6),
through which |; can fow. The increase in I; 0 -90 ” 0
leads to a steeper slope of phase 4 depolariza- Membrane voltage
tion, causing the SA node to reach threshold FIGURE 11-6. Effect of sympathetic and
and fire earlier than normal and the heart rate parasympathetic (cholinergic) stimulation
to increase. on pacemaker current channels. The channels

In addition, sympathetic stimulation shifts through which the pacemaker current (I;) flows
the action potential threshold to more nega- are voltage gated, opening at more negative
tive voltages by increasing the probability that membrane potentials. At any given voltage,
voltage-sensitive Ca** channels are capable of there exists a probability between 0 and I that
opening (recall that calctum carries the current a speci ¢ channel will be open. Compared with

, ; normal baseline behavior (curve A), sympathetic
of phase 0 depolarization in pacemaker cells). gtimulation (curve B) or treatment with
Therefore, phase 4 depolarization reaches the anticholinergic drugs shifts this probability to
threshold potential earlier. Sympathetic activity a higher value for any given level of membrane
thus increases sinus node automaticity both by voltage, thus increasing the number of open
increasing the rate of pacemaker depolarization Channels and the rate at which the cell will fre.
via I; and by causing the action potential thresh- Curve Cshows that parasympathetic cholinergic

. . stimulation (or treatment with a B-blocker,
old to become more negative. Examples of this which antagonizes sympathetic stimulation) has
normal physiologic effect occur during physical the opposite effect, decreasing the probability
exercise or emotional stress, when sympathetic of a channel being open and therefore inhibiting
stimulation appropriately increases the heart rate. depolarization.
274 (chapter 11

Decreased Sinus Node Automaticity
Normal decreases in SA node automaticity are mediated by reduced sympathetic stimulation
and by increased activity of the parasympathetic nervous system. Whereas activation of the
sympathetic nervous system has a major role in increasing the heart rate during times of
stress, the parasympathetic nervous system is the major controller of the heart rate at rest.

Cholinergic (1.e., parasympathetic) stimulation via the vagus nerve acts at the SA node
to reduce the probability of pacemaker channels being open (see Fig. 11-6). Thus, I; and the
slope of phase 4 depolarization are reduced, and the intrinsic firing rate of the cell is slowed.
In addition, the probability of the Ca** channels being open is decreased, such that the action
potential threshold increases to a less negative potential. Furthermore, cholinergic stimulation
increases the probability of acetylcholine-sensitive K’ channels being open at rest. Positively
charged K* ions exit through these “inward rectifier” channels, which differ from the K*
channels that are active in phase 3 repolarization (see Chapter 1), producing an outward cur-
rent that drives the diastolic potential more negative. The overall effect of reduced I;, a more
negative maximum diastolic potential, and a less negative threshold level is a slowing of the
intrinsic firing rate and therefore a reduced heart rate.

It follows that the use of pharmacologic agents that modify these effects of the auto-
nomic nervous system will also affect the firing rate of the SA node. For example, B-receptor
blocking drugs (“B-blockers”) antagonize the B-adrenergic sympathetic effect; therefore,
they decrease the rate of phase 4 depolarization of the SA node and slow the heart rate.
Conversely, atropine, an anticholinergic (antimuscarinic) drug, has the opposite effect: by
blocking parasympathetic activity, the rate of phase 4 depolarization increases and the heart
rate accelerates.

Escape Rhythms
If the sinus node becomes suppressed and fires much less frequently than normal, the site of
impulse formation may shift to a latent pacemaker within the specialized conduction path-
way. An impulse initiated by a latent pacemaker because the SA node rate has slowed 1s called
an escape beat. Persistent impairment of the SA node will allow a continued series of escape
beats, termed an escape rhythm. Escape rhythms are protective in that they prevent the heart
rate from becoming pathologically slow when SA node firing is impaired.

As discussed in the previous section, suppression of sinus node activity may occur because
of increased parasympathetic tone. Different regions of the heart have varied sensitivities to
parasympathetic (vagal) stimulation. The SA node and the AV node are most sensitive to
such an infuence, followed by atrial tissue. The ventricular conducting system is the least
sensitive. Therefore, moderate parasympathetic stimulation slows the sinus rate and allows
the pacemaker to shift to the AV node. However, very strong parasympathetic stimulation
suppresses excitability at both the SA node and AV node and may therefore result in the emer-
gence of a ventricular escape pacemaker.

Enhanced Automaticity of Latent Pacemakers
Another means by which a latent pacemaker can assume control of impulse formation is if
it develops an intrinsic rate of depolarization faster than that of the sinus node. Termed an
ectopic beat, such an impulse is premature relative to the normal rhythm, whereas an escape
beat is late and terminates a pause caused by a slowed sinus rhythm. A sequence of similar
ectopic beats is called an ectopic rhythm.

Ectopic beats may arise in several circumstances. For example, high catecholamine con-
centrations can enhance the automaticity of latent pacemakers, and if the resulting rate of
depolarization exceeds that of the sinus node, then an ectopic rhythm will develop. Ectopic
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 275
beats are also commonly induced by hypoxemia, ischemia, electrolyte disturbances, and
certain drug toxicities (such as digitalis, as described in Chapter 17).

Abnormal Automaticity

Cardiac tissue injury may lead to pathologic changes in impulse formation whereby myocar-
dial cells outside the specialized conduction system acquire automaticity and spontaneously
depolarize. Although such activity may appear similar to impulses originating from latent
pacemakers within the specialized conduction pathways, these ectopic beats arise from cells
that do not usually possess automaticity. If the rate of depolarization of such cells exceeds
that of the sinus node, they transiently take over the pacemaker function and become the
source of an abnormal ectopic rhythm.

Because these myocardial cells have few or no activated pacemaker channels, they do
not normally carry |; How injury allows such cells to spontaneously depolarize has not
been fully elucidated. However, when cardiac tissue becomes injured, its cellular membranes
become “leaky.” As such, they are unable to maintain the concentration gradients of ions,
and the resting potential becomes less negative (i.e., the cell partially depolarizes). When a
cell’s membrane potential is reduced to a value less negative than —60 mV, gradual phase
4 depolarization can be demonstrated even among nonpacemaker cells. This spontaneous
depolarization probably results from a very slowly inactivating calcium current, a decrease
in the outward potassium current that normally acts to repolarize the cell, and less effect of
the inward rectif er K* current that normally holds cells at a more negative potential range.

‘Higgered Activity

Under certain conditions, an action potential can “trigger” abnormal depolarizations that result
in extra heart beats or tachyarrhythmias. This process may occur when the f rst action potential
leads to oscillations of the membrane voltage known as afterdepolarizations. Unlike the sponta-
neous activity seen when enhanced automaticity occurs, this type of automaticity is stimulated
by a preceding action potential. As illustrated in Figures 11-7 and 11-8, there are two types of
afterdepolarizations depending on their timing after the inciting action potential: early afterde-
polarizations occur during the repolarization phase of the inciting beat, whereas delayed after-
depolarizations occur shortly after repolarization has been completed. In either case, abnormal
action potentials are triggered if the afterdepolarization reaches a threshold voltage.

Early afterdepolarizations are changes of the membrane potential in the positive direction
that interrupt normal repolarization (see Fig. 11-7). They can occur either during the plateau
of the action potential (phase 2) or during rapid repolarization (phase 3). Early afterdepolar-
izations are more likely to develop in conditions that prolong the action potential duration
(and therefore the electrocardiographic QT interval), as may occur during therapy with cer-
tain drugs (see Chapter 17) and in the inherited long QT syndromes (see Chapter 12).

Early afterdepolarization

S 4

E 0 ‘ n n '

$ AP PAPA
HIGURE 11-7. Triggered activity. An early 5 pS ‘
afterdepolarization (arrow) occurs before the action 4 ~50 ~
potential (AP) has fully repolarized. Repetitive ©
afterdepolarizations (dashed curve) may produce a =
rapid sequence of triggered action potentials and =
hence a tachyarrhythmia. -100
276 Chapter

>

E o oN

G 54

3 +\) FIGURE 11-8. Triggered activity. A .

@ ~50 : Delayed afterdepolarization delayed afterdepolarization (arrow) arises

© ‘ y after the cell has fully repolarized. If the

= - delayed afterdepolarization reaches the

2 threshold voltage, a propagated action
~100 potential (AP) is triggered (dashed curve).

The ionic current responsible for an early afterdepolarization depends on the membrane
voltage at which the triggered event occurs. If the early afterdepolarization occurs during
phase 2 of the action potential, when most of the Na* channels are still in an inactivated state,
the upstroke of the triggered beat relies mostly on an inward Ca** current. If, however, the
afterdepolarization occurs during phase 3 (when the membrane voltage is more negative),
there is partial recovery of the inactivated Na* channels, which then contribute more to the
current underlying the triggered beat.

An early afterdepolarization-triggered action potential can be self-perpetuating and lead to
a series of depolarizations and therefore a tachyarrhythmia (see Fig. 11-7). Early afterdepo-
larizations appear to be the initiating mechanism of the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
known as torsades de pointes, which is described in Chapter 12.

Delayed afterdepolarizations may appear shortly after repolarization is complete (see
Fig. 11-8). They most commonly develop in states of high intracellular calcium, as may be
present with digitalis intoxication (see Chapter 17), or during marked catecholamine stimu-
lation. It is thought that intracellular Ca** accumulation causes the activation of chloride
currents, or of the Na*—Ca** exchanger, that results in brief inward currents that generate the
delayed afterdepolarization.

As with early afterdepolarizations, if the amplitude of the delayed afterdepolarization
reaches a threshold voltage, an action potential will be generated. Such action potentials can
be self-perpetuating and lead to tachyarrhythmias. Some idiopathic ventricular tachycardias
that occur in otherwise structurally normal hearts are likely due to this mechanism, as are
atrial and ventricular tachycardias associated with digitalis toxicity (see Chapter 17).
Alterations in impulse conduction also lead to arrhythmias. Conduction blocks generally slow
the heart rate (bradyarrhythmias); however, under certain circumstances, the process of reen-
try (described later) can ensue and produce abnormal fast rhythms (tachyarrhythmias).

(nduction Block
A propagating impulse is blocked when it encounters a region of the heart that is electrically
unexcitable. Conduction block can be either transient or permanent and may be unidirectional
(i.e., conduction proceeds when the involved region is stimulated from one direction but
not when stimulated from the opposite direction) or bidirectional (conduction is blocked in
both directions). Various conditions may cause conduction block, including ischemia, fibro-
sis, infammation, and certain drugs. When conduction block occurs because a propagating
impulse encounters cardiac cells that are still refractory from a previous depolarization, the
block is said to be functional. A propagating impulse that arrives a short time later, when the
tissue is no longer refractory, may be conducted appropriately. For example, antiarrhythmic
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 277
drugs that prolong the action potential duration (described in Chapter 17) tend to produce
functional conduction blocks. Conversely, when conduction block is caused by a barrier
imposed by fibrosis or scarring that replaces myocytes, the block is said to be f xed.

Conduction block within the specialized conducting system of the AV node or the His—
Purkinje system prevents normal propagation of the cardiac impulse from the sinus node to
more distal sites. This atrioventricular block (AV block) removes the normal overdrive sup-
pression that keeps latent pacemakers in the His—Purkinje system in check. Thus, conduction
block usually results in emergence of escape beats or escape rhythms, as the more distal sites
assume the pacemaker function.

AV block is common and a major reason for implantation of a permanent pacemaker, as
discussed in Chapter 12.

Unidirectional Block and Reentry
A common mechanism by which altered impulse conduction leads to tachyarrhythmias is
termed reentry. During such a rhythm, an electric impulse circulates repeatedly around a
reentry path, recurrently depolarizing a region of cardiac tissue.

During normal cardiac conduction, each electric impulse that originates in the SA node
travels in an orderly, sequential fashion through the rest of the heart, ultimately depolarizing
all the myocardial fibers. The refractory period of each cell prevents immediate reexcitation
from adjacent depolarized cells, so that the impulse stops when all of the heart muscle has
been excited. However, conduction blocks that prevent rapid depolarization of parts of the
myocardium can create an environment conducive to continued impulse propagation and
reentry, as illustrated in Figure 11-9.

The figure depicts electric activity as it fows through a branch point anywhere within the
conduction pathways. Panel A shows propagation of a normal action potential. At point x,
the impulse branches into two pathways (a and £) and travels down each into the more
distal conduction tissue. In the normal heart, the a and B pathways have similar conduction
velocities and refractory periods such that portions of the wave fronts that pass through
them may collide in the distal conduction tissue and extinguish each other, as shown by the
red line.

Panel B shows what happens if conduction is blocked in one limb of the pathways. In
this example, the action potential is obstructed when it encounters the B pathway from
above and therefore propagates only down the a tract into the distal tissue. As the impulse
continues to spread, it encounters the distal end of the B pathway (at point y). If the tissue
in the distal B tract is also unable to conduct, the impulse simply continues to propagate
into the deeper tissues and reentry does not occur. However, if the impulse at point y is able
to propagate retrogradely (backward) into pathway B, one of the necessary conditions for
reentry is met.

When an action potential can conduct in a retrograde direction in a conduction pathway,
whereas it had been prevented from doing so in the forward direction, unidirectional block is
said to be present. Unidirectional block tends to occur in regions where the refractory periods
of adjacent cells are heterogeneous, such that some cells recover before others. In addition,
unidirectional block may occur in states of cellular dysfunction and in regions where fibrosis
has altered the myocardial structure.

As shown in panel C of Figure 11-9, if the impulse is able to propagate retrogradely up the
B pathway, it will again arrive at point x. At that time, if the a pathway has not yet repolarized
from the previous action potential that had occurred moments earlier, that limb is refractory
to repeat stimulation and the returning impulse simply stops there.

However, panel D illustrates what happens if the velocity of retrograde conduction in the
diseased B path is not normal but slower than normal. In that case, sufficient time may elapse
for the a pathway to repolarize before the returning impulse reaches point x from the B limb.
278 (chapter 11
Normal Action
potential
x
Distal conduction tissue
A
Unidirectional
block
x
aL Ya B
B
Normal Slowed
retrograde retrograde
conduction conduction
velocity ve locity
x x
a B a. B
y j\ y

Cc D
FIGURE 11-9. Mechanism of reentry. A. Normal conduction. When an action potential (AP) reaches a branch
in the conduction pathway (point x), the impulse travels down both fbers (a and f) to excite distal conduction
tissue. B. Unidirectional block. Forward passage of the impulse is blocked in the B pathway but proceeds
normally down the a pathway. When the impulse reaches point y, if retrograde conduction of the B pathway is
intact, the AP can enter B from below and conduct in a retrograde fashion. C When point x is reached again,
if the a pathway has not had suff cient time to repolarize, then the impulse stops. D. However, if conduction
through the retrograde pathway is suff ciently slow (jagged line), it reaches point x after the « pathway has
recovered. In that circumstance, the impulse is able to excite the a pathway again and a reentrant loop is
formed.
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 279
Then, the invading impulse is able to stimulate the a pathway once again, and the cycle
repeats itself. This circular stimulation can continue indefinitely, and each pass of the impulse
through the loop excites cells of the distal conduction tissue, which propagates to the rest of
the myocardium, at an abnormally high rate, resulting in a tachyarrhythmia.

For the mechanism of reentry to occur, the propagating impulse must continuously
encounter excitable tissue. Thus, the time it takes for the impulse to travel around the reen-
trant loop must be greater than the time required for recovery (the refractory period) of the
tissue, and this must be true for each point in the circuit. If the conduction time is shorter
than the recovery time, the impulse will encounter refractory tissue and stop. Because nor-
mal conduction velocity in ventricular muscle is approximately 50 cm/s and the average
effective refractory period is about 0.2 seconds, a reentry path circuit would need to be at
least 10 cm long for reentry to occur in a normal ventricle. However, with slower conduction
velocities, a shorter reentry circuit is possible. Most clinical cases of reentry occur within
small regions of tissue because the conduction velocity within the reentrant loop is, in fact,
abnormally slow.

In summary, the two critical conditions for reentry are (1) unidirectional block and
(2) slowed conduction through the reentry path. These conditions commonly occur in
regions where fibrosis has developed, such as infarction scars. In some cases, reentry occurs
over an anatomically fixed circuit or path, such as AV reentry using an accessory pathway
(as discussed in the following section). Reentry around distinct anatomic pathways usu-
ally appears as a monomorphic tachycardia on the electrocardiogram (ECG); that is, in the
case of ventricular tachycardia, each QRS has the same appearance as the preceding and
subsequent QRS complexes. This is because the reentry path is the same from beat to beat,
producing a stable, regular tachycardia. This is the most common mechanism of ventricular
tachycardia associated with areas of ventricular scar, as may result from a prior myocardial
infarction.

Other types of reentry do not require a stable, fixed path. For example, one form can
occur in electrically heterogeneous myocardium, in which waves of reentrant excitation spi-
ral through the tissue, continually changing direction. These so-called “spiral waves” can be
initiated when a wave front of depolarization encounters a broad region of functional block,
which could be refractory from a preceding wave front, be poorly excitable tissue due to myo-
cardial ischemia, or be under the infuence of certain antiarrhythmic medications. Forward
propagation of the wave front is asymmetrically blocked by this region, as the remainder of
the front proceeds around the block. As the region repolarizes and becomes excitable again,
parts of the wave front then spread retrogradely through it and continue in a spiral path fol-
lowing in the wake of the depolarization that had just passed. Unlike an anatomically fixed
reentrant tract, the center of the spiral wave can move through the myocardium and even split
into two or more reentry waves. In the ventricles, the resulting tachycardia has a continually
changing QRS appearance, producing polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. If such activation
is rapid and very disorganized, no distinct QRS complexes will be discernable and the rhythm
is ventricular f brillation (as described in Chapter 12).

Accessory Pathways and the Wolff—Parkinson—White Syndrome
The mechanism of reentry is dramatically illustrated by the Wolff-Parkinson—White (WPW)
syndrome. In the normal heart, an impulse generated by the SA node propagates through
atrial tissue to the AV node, where expected slower conduction causes a short delay before
continuing on to the ventricles. However, approximately | in 1,500 people has the WPW syn-
drome and is born with an additional connection between an atrium and ventricle. Termed
an accessory pathway (or bypass tract), this connection allows conduction between the atria
and ventricles to bypass the AV node. The most common type of accessory pathway consists
280 (chapter 11
AV node Normal ECG
QRS
SA node fn
( \ P | T
Bypass tract c f» ECG with bypass tract
Widened
| | 4 ORS
Right s J ~
bundle \ \
branch ™N!
X oy / Delta wave
pe bundle Shortened PR
FIGURE 11-10. Accessory pathway (also termed a bypass tract). Example of an atrioventricular bypass tract
(bundle of Kent), shown schematically, which can conduct impulses from the atrium directly to the ventricles,
bypassing the AVnode. The ECGdemonstrates a shortened PR interval and a “delta wave” caused by early
excitation of the ventricles via the accessory pathway. ECG electrocardiogram; SA, sinoatrial.
of microscopic f bers (known as a bundle of Kent) that span the AV groove somewhere along
the mitral or tricuspid annuli, as shown in Figure 11-10.

Because accessory pathway tissue conducts impulses faster than the AV node, stimula-
tion of the ventricles during sinus rhythm begins earlier than normal and the PR interval of
the ECG is therefore shortened (usually <0.12 seconds, or <3 small boxes). In this situation,
the ventricles are said to be “preexcited.” However, the accessory pathway connects to ven-
tricular myocardium rather than to the Purkinje system, such that the subsequent spread of
the impulse through the ventricles from that site is slower than usual. In addition, because
normal conduction over the AV node proceeds concurrently, ventricular depolarization rep-
resents a combination of the electric impulse traveling via the accessory tract and that con-
ducted through the normal Purkinje system. As a result, the QRS complex in patients with
WPW is wider than normal and demonstrates an abnormally slurred initial upstroke, known
as a delta wave (Fig. 11-10).

During sinus rhythm, simultaneous conduction through the accessory pathway and AV node
results in this interesting ECG appearance but causes no symptoms. The presence of the abnor-
mal pathway, however, creates an ideal condition for reentry because the refractory period of the
pathway is usually different from that of the AV node. An appropriately timed abnormal impulse
(e.g., a premature beat) may encounter block in the accessory pathway but conduct through the
AV node or vice versa. If the propagating impulse then fnds that the initially blocked pathway
has recovered (unidirectional block), it can conduct in a retrograde direction up to the atrium
and then down the other pathway back to the ventricles. Thus, a large anatomic loop is estab-
lished, with the accessory pathway serving as one limb and the normal conduction pathway
through the AV node as the other. The clinical characteristics of the WPW syndrome, including
the types of reentrant tachycardia associated with it, are described in Chapter 12.

The mechanisms of altered impulse formation and conduction form the basis of all com-
mon arrhythmias, both abnormally slow rhythms (bradyarrhythmias) and abnormally fast
ones (tachyarrhythmias). Table 11-1 lists the underlying mechanisms and examples of their
commonly associated rhythm disturbances.
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 281
Abnormality Mechanism Examples
Bradyarrhythmias
Altered impulse formation
* Decreased automaticity Decreased phase 4 depolarization Sinus bradycardia
(e.g., parasympathetic
stimulation)
Altered impulse conduction
* @nduction blocks Ischemic, anatomic, or drug-induced _ First-, second-, and third-degree AV
impaired conduction blocks
Tachyarrhythmias
Altered impulse formation
* Fnhanced automaticity
Sinus node Increased phase 4 depolarization Sinus tachycardia
(e.g., sympathetic stimulation)
AV node AV junctional tachycardia
Ectopic focus Acquires phase 4 depolarization Ectopic atrial tachycardia and some
forms of VI
° Triggered activity
Early afterdepolarization Prolonged action potential duration Torsades de pointes
Delayed Intracellular calcium overload APBs, VPBs, digitalis-induced
afterdepolarization (e.g., digitalis toxicity) arrhythmias, “idiopathic” VI
Altered impulse conduction
° Reentry Unidirectional block plus slowed
conduction
Anatomical Atrial flutter, AVnodal reentrant
tachycardia, VI related to ventricular
scar tissue
Functional Atrial f brillation, polymorphic VI
ventricular f brillation
I
AV atrioventricular; APB, atrial premature beat; VPB, ventricular premature beat; VI ventricular tachycardia.
Appropriate treatment of a rhythm disorder depends on its severity and its likely mechanism.
When an arrhythmia produces severe hypotension or cardiac arrest, it must be immediately
terminated to restore effective cardiac function. Therapy for termination may include electri-
cal cardioversion (an electric “shock”) for tachycardias, cardiac pacing for bradycardias, or
administration of medications.
Additional therapy to prevent recurrences is guided by the etiology of the rhythm disturbance.
Correctable factors that contribute to abnormal impulse formation and conduction (such as isch-
emia or electrolyte abnormalities) should be corrected. If there is a risk of recurrent arrhythmia,
medications that alter automaticity, conduction, and/or refractoriness may be administered,
or catheter or surgical ablation of conduction pathways is undertaken to physically disrupt the
region responsible for the arrhythmia. Other advanced options include implantation of a perma-
nent pacemaker for serious bradyarrhythmias or an internal cardioverter—def brillator (ICD) to
automatically terminate malignant tachyarrhythmias should they recur. The following sections
summarize the common therapeutic modalities, and Chapter 12 describes how they are used to
address specif c rhythm disorders.
282 chapter 11
Bradyarrhythmias

Not all slow heart rhythms require specif c treatment. For those that do, pharmacologic ther-

apy can increase the heart rate acutely, but the effect is transient. Electronic pacemakers are

used when more sustained therapy is needed.
Pharmacologic Therapy

Pharmacologic therapy of bradyarrhythmias modif es the autonomic input to the heart in one

of two ways:

1. Anticholinergic drugs (i.e., antimuscarinic agents such as atropine). Vagal stimulation
reduces the rate of sinus node depolarization (which slows the heart rate) and decreases
conduction through the AV node, through the release of acetylcholine onto muscarinic
receptors. Anticholinergic drugs competitively bind to muscarinic receptors and thereby
reduce the vagal effect. This results in an increased heart rate and enhanced AV nodal
conduction.

2. B,;-Receptor agonists (e.g., isoproterenol). Mimicking the effect of endogenous catechol-
amines, these drugs increase heart rate and speed AV nodal conduction.

Atropine and isoproterenol are administered intravenously. Although these drugs are use-
ful in managing certain slow heart rhythms emergently, it is not practical to continue them
over the long term to treat persistent bradyarrhythmias.

Hectronic Pacemakers

Electronic pacemakers apply repeated electric stimulation to the heart to initiate depolariza-

tions at a desired rate, thereby assuming control of the rhythm. Pacemakers may be installed

on a temporary or a permanent basis. Temporary units are used to stabilize patients who are
awaiting implantation of a permanent pacemaker or to treat transient bradyarrhythmias, such
as those caused by reversible drug toxicities.

There are two types of temporary pacemakers. External transthoracic pacemakers deliver
electric pulses to the patient’s chest through large adhesive electrodes placed on the skin. The
advantage of this technique is that it can be applied rapidly. Unfortunately, because the cur-
rent used must be suff cient to initiate a cardiac depolarization, it stimulates thoracic nerves
and skeletal muscle, which can be quite uncomfortable. Therefore, this form of pacing is
usually used only on an emergency basis until another means of treating the arrhythmia can
be implemented.

The other option for temporary pacing is a transvenous unit. In this case, an electrode-
tipped catheter is inserted percutaneously into the venous system, passed into the heart, and
connected to an external power source (termed a pulse generator). Electric pulses are applied
directly to the heart through the electrode catheter, which is typically placed in the right ven-
tricle or right atrium. This type of pacing is not painful and can be effective for days. There is,
however, a risk of infection and/or thrombosis associated with the catheter.

Permanent pacemakers are more sophisticated than the temporary variety. Various con-
f gurations can sense and capture the electric activity of the atria and/or ventricles. One or
more wires (known as leads) with pacing electrodes are passed through an axillary or subcla-
vian vein into the right ventricle or right atrium, or through the coronary sinus into a cardiac
vein (to stimulate the left ventricle). The pulse generator, similar in size to two silver dollars
stacked on top of one another, is connected to the leads and then implanted under the skin,
typically in the infraclavicular region. The pacemaker battery typically lasts about 10 years.

Modern permanent pacemakers sense cardiac activity and pace only when needed. They
incorporate complex functions to track the patient’s normal heart rate and can stimulate beats
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 283
automatically in response to activity. They can also record useful data, such as whether fast
rates have been sensed (that might indicate a tachyarrhythmia), the amount of pacing that
has been required, and other parameters of pacemaker function. An external radio frequency
programming device is used to “interrogate” the pacemaker to obtain the recorded informa-
tion and to adjust the pacing functions.

Although the most common indications for permanent pacemakers are bradyarrhythmias,
pacemakers that incorporate a left ventricular pacing lead are also used to improve cardiac per-
formance in some patients with heart failure (cardiac resynchronization therapy—see Chapter 9).
The treatment of tachyarrhythmias is directed at (1) protection of the patient from the con-
sequences of the arrhythmia and (2) the specifc mechanism responsible for the abnor-
mal rhythm. Pharmacologic agents and cardioversion/def brillation are commonly used
approaches, but innovative electronic devices and transvenous catheter—based techniques
to intentionally damage (ablate) arrhythmia-causing tissue have revolutionized treatment of
these disorders.

Pharmacologic Therapy

Pharmacologic management of tachyarrhythmias is directed against the underlying mecha-

nism (abnormal automaticity, reentrant circuits, or triggered activity). Many antiarrhythmic

drugs are available, and the choice of which to use relies on the cause of the specif c arrhyth-

mia. From consideration of the arrhythmia mechanisms presented in this chapter, the follow-

ing strategies emerge:

Desired Drug Effects to Eliminate Rhythms Caused by Increased Automaticity:

1. Reduce the slope of phase 4 spontaneous depolarization of the automatic cells

2. Make the diastolic potential more negative (hyperpolarize)

3. Make the threshold potential less negative

Desired Antiarrhythmic Effects to Interrupt Reentrant Circuits:

1. Inhibit conduction in the reentry circuit to the point that conduction fails, thus stopping
the reentry impulse

2. Increase the refractory period within the reentrant circuit so that a propagating impulse
finds tissue within the loop unexcitable and the impulse stops

3. Suppress premature beats that can initiate reentry

Desired Drug Effects to Eliminate Triggered Activity:

1. Shorten the action potential duration (to prevent early afterdepolarizations)

2. Correct conditions of calcium overload (to prevent delayed afterdepolarizations)

Drugs used to achieve these goals modulate the action potential through interactions with
ion channels, surface receptors, and transport pumps. Many drugs have multiple effects and
may attack arrhythmias through more than one mechanism. The commonly used antiarrhyth-
mic drugs and their actions are described in Chapter 17.

It is important to recognize that although these drugs suppress arrhythmias, they also
have the potential to aggravate or provoke certain rhythm disturbances. This undesired con-
sequence is referred to as proarrhythmia and is a major limitation of contemporary antiar-
rhythmic drug therapy. For example, antiarrhythmic agents that act therapeutically to prolong
the action potential duration can, as an undesired effect, cause early afterdepolarizations,
the mechanism underlying the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia torsades de pointes (see
284 chapter 11
Chapter 12). In addition, most agents used to treat tachyarrhythmias have the potential to
ageravate bradyarrhythmias, and all antiarrhythmics have potentially toxic noncardiac side
effects. These shortcomings have led to an increased reliance on nonpharmacologic treatment
options, as described in the following sections.

Vagotonic Maneuvers
Many tachycardias involve transmission of impulses through the AV node, a structure that is
sensitive to vagal modulation. Vagal tone can be transiently increased by a number of bedside
maneuvers, and performing these may slow conduction, which terminates some reentrant
tachyarrhythmias. For example, carotid sinus massage is performed by rubbing firmly for
a few seconds over the carotid sinus, located at the bifurcation of the internal and external
carotid arteries on either side of the neck. This maneuver stimulates the baroreceptor ref ex
(see Chapter 13), which elicits the desired increase in vagal tone and withdrawal of sympa-
thetic tone. This maneuver should be performed on only one carotid sinus at a time (to pre-
vent interference with brain perfusion) and is best avoided in patients with known advanced
atherosclerosis involving the carotid arteries.

Hectric Gardioversion and Def brillation
Cardioversion and defibrillation involve the application of an electric shock to terminate a
tachycardia. A shock with sufficient energy depolarizes the bulk of excitable myocardial tis-
sue, interrupts reentrant circuits, establishes electric homogeneity, and allows the sinus node
(the site of fastest spontaneous discharge) to regain pacemaker control. Tachyarrhythmias
that are caused by reentry can usually be terminated by this procedure, whereas arrhythmias
due to abnormal automaticity may simply persist.

External cardioversion is used to terminate supraventricular tachycardias or organized
ventricular tachycardias. It is performed by briefy sedating the patient and then placing
two large electrode paddles (or adhesive electrodes) against the chest on either side of the
heart. The electric discharge is electronically synchronized to occur at the time of a QRS com-
plex (1.e., when ventricular depolarization occurs). This prevents the possibility of discharge
during the T wave, when a shock could induce reentry (leading to ventricular fibrillation)
because regions of myocardium are in different phases of depolarization and recovery.

External def brillation is performed to terminate ventricular fibrillation, employing the
same equipment as that used for cardioversion. However, during fibrillation, there is no orga-
nized QRS complex on which to synchronize the electric discharge, so it is delivered using the
“asynchronous” mode of the device.

Implantable Cardioverter—Def brillators

ICDs automatically terminate dangerous ventricular arrhythmias using internal cardioversion/
defibrillation or by way of a special type of artificial pacing. These devices are implanted, in
a manner similar to that of permanent pacemakers, in patients at high risk of sudden cardiac
death from ventricular arrhythmias. The device continuously monitors cardiac activity, and if
the heart rate exceeds a certain programmable threshold for a specified time, the ICD delivers
an appropriate intervention, such as an electric shock. Internal cardioversion or defibrillation
requires substantially less energy than does external defibrillation but is still painful if the
patient is conscious.

The majority of monomorphic ventricular tachycardias can be terminated by an ICD with
a rapid burst of electric impulses, termed antitachycardia pacing (ATP), rather than a shock.
The goal is to artificially pace the heart at a rate faster than the tachycardia to prematurely
depolarize a portion of a reentrant circuit, thereby rendering it refractory to further immediate
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias 285
stimulation. Consequently, when a reentrant impulse returns to the zone that has already
been depolarized by the device, it encounters unexcitable tissue, it cannot propagate further,
and the circuit is broken. An advantage of the ATP technique is that, unlike internal cardio-
version, it is painless. However, ATP is not effective for terminating ventricular f brillation, a
situation in which the device is programmed to deliver an electric shock instead.

Catheter Ablation

If an arrhythmia originates from a distinct anatomical reentry circuit or an automatic focus,
electrophysiologic mapping techniques can be used to localize the region of myocardium or
conduction tissue responsible for the disturbance. It is then often possible to ablate the site
via a catheter that applies radiofrequency current to heat and destroy the tissue. Such pro-
cedures have revolutionized the management of patients with many types of tachycardias,
because they often offer a permanent therapeutic solution that spares patients from prolonged
antiarrhythmic drug therapy. Additionally, for patients with ICDs and recurrent ventricular
tachycardias causing def brillator shocks, ablation is often effective in reducing the frequency
of episodes.

° Arrhythmias result from disorders of impulse formation, impulse conduction, or both.

° Bradyarrhythmias (abnormally slow heart rhythms) develop because of decreased impulse
formation (e.g., sinus bradycardia) or decreased impulse conduction (e.g., AV nodal conduc-
tion blocks).

° Tachyarrhythmias (abnormally fast rhythms) result from increased automaticity (of the SA
node, latent pacemakers, or abnormal myocardial sites), triggered activity, or reentry.

e The two critical conditions for reentry are (1) unidirectional block and (2) slowed conduction
through the reentry path; these conditions commonly occur in regions where f brosis has
developed, such as infarction scars.

° Bradyarrhythmias are usually treated acutely with drugs that accelerate the rate of sinus
node discharge and enhance AV nodal conduction (atropine, isoproterenol) or with tempo-
rary electronic pacemakers.

e Permanent electronic pacemakers are implanted when more sustained therapy for
bradyarrhythmias is needed.

° Pharmacologic therapy for tachyarrhythmias is directed at the mechanism responsible for the
rhythm disturbance.

° For refractory tachyarrhythmias, or in emergency situations, electrical cardioversion or
def brillation is utilized.

° Catheter-based ablative techniques are useful for long-term control of certain
tachyarrhythmias.

° ICDs are lifesaving devices implanted in patients at high risk of sudden cardiac death.

e For patients with ICDs and recurrent ventricular tachycardias causing def brillator shocks,
ablation techniques are often effective in reducing the frequency of episodes.

Chapter 12 describes the diagnosis and management of the most common arrhythmias.

Chapter 17 describes commonly used antiarrhythmic drugs.

Acknowledgments

Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Ranliang Hu, MD; Hillary K. Rolls, MD;

Jennifer E. Ho, MD; Mark S. Sabatine, MD; Wendy Armstrong, MD; Nicholas Boulis, MD; Elliott

M. Antman, MD; and Leonard I. Ganz, MD.
286 Chapter 11

Additional Reading

Chen PS, Joung B, Shinohara T, et al. The initiation of the Katritsis DG, Camm AJ. Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachy-
heart beat. Circ J. 2010;74:221-225. cardia. Circulation. 2010;122:831—840.

DiFrancesco D. The role of the funny current in pacemaker Spector P. Principles of cardiac electric propagation and their
activity. Circ Res. 2010;106:434—446. implications for re-entrant arrhythmias. Circ Arrhythm

Grant AO. Cardiac ion channels. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. Electrophysiol. 2013;6:655—661.
2009;2:185-194.
' J ] a
Ginical Aspects of ia
p ti
Cardiac Arrhythmias | |)
I : a
y i
Morgan J. Prust
William G. Stevenson .
Leonard S. Lilly é
—
Chapter Outline Ce 11 presented the mechanisms by which abnormal
heart rhythms develop. This chapter describes how to rec-
EB mad vary tbmias ognize and treat specifc arrhythmias. Table 12-1 categorizes
Sinoatrial Node : : a
BR the common rhythm disorders considered in this chapter.
cape Rhythms :
ey ae reer There are f ve basic questions to consider when confronted
System with a patient with an abnormal heart rhythm, as detailed in
Tachyarrhythmias the sections that follow:
Supraventrictlar Arrhythmias
Ventricular Arrhythmias 1. Identif cation: What is arrhythmia?
2. Pathogenesis: What is the underlying mechanism?
3. Precipitating factors: What conditions provoke it?
4. Cinical presentation: What symptoms and signs accompany
the arrhythmia?
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
The normal resting heart rate, resulting from repetitive depo-
larization of the sinus node, ranges from 60 to 100 bpm.
Bradyarrhythmias are rhythms in which the heart rate is less
than 60 bpm. They arise from disorders of impulse formation
or impaired impulse conduction, as described in Chapter 11.
a Sinus Bradycardia
