.
¥ 1g —
mi
fl
Valvular Heart Disease “
rs - ' * j)
Elizabeth Ryznar .
Patrick T. O'Gara Jy
Leonard S. Lilly
4 .
——
Chapter Outline T his chapter describes the pathophysiologic abnor-
malities in patients with common valvular heart dis-
Mitral Nalve Disease eases. Each condition is discussed separately because
Mtral Stenosis a a :
Mitral Recurgitation unifying principles do not govern the behavior of all ste-
Mtral Valve Prolapse notic or regurgitant valves. Effective patient management
Aortic Valve Disease requires accurate identif cation of the valve lesion, a deter-
Aortic Stenosis mination of its severity, and a clear understanding of the
SOIC Nepean pathophysiologic consequences and natural history of the
ns e Disease condition.
i nosi
a The evaluation of a patient with suspected valvular
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Palinciic Waive TRecisc disease begins at the bedside with a careful history and
Pulmonic Stenosis physical examination from which the trained clinician can
Pulmonic Regurgitation usually identify the type of abnormality present. Defni-
i . . rn cat echocardiography (TIE), which allows for staging of disease
Pathogenesis . ; a . oor .
Ginical- Manifestations severity. In selected patients, additional investigation with
ST exercise testing or cardiac catheterization may be neces-
Prevention sary to fully defne the signifcance of the condition and
guide therapy.
Management of patients with heart valve disease often
involves serial clinical and echocardiographic assessments.
Pharmacologic therapy is sometimes prescribed for sympto-
matic improvement, but recognition of timely indications for
valve repair or replacement is essential, as will be described
192
Valvular Heart Disease 193
MITRAL VALVE DISEASE
Mitral Stenosis
Hiology
By far, the most common underlying cause of mitral stenosis (MS) is prior rheumatic fever
(see Box 8-1). Approximately 50% to 70% of patients with symptomatic MS provide a history
of acute rheumatic fever occurring, on average, 20 years before presentation. Other rare etiol-
ogies of MS include calcification of the mitral annulus that extends onto the leaf ets, infective
a
BOX8-1 Rheumatic Fever
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is an inf ammatory condition that primarily affects the heart, skin,
and connective tissues. Its incidence has waned greatly in the past century in industrialized
societies, where it is now rare, but it remains a major burden in developing countries. ARF arises
as a complication of pharyngitis caused by group A beta-hemolytic streptococci and mainly aff icts
children and young adults. During prior epidemics, approximately 3% of patients with acute
streptococcal pharyngitis developed ARF 2 to 3 weeks after the initial throat infection. G@mmon
presenting symptoms are chills, fever, fatigue, and migratory arthritis. The cardinal clinical
manifestations that establish the diagnosis are known as Jones criteria (see Table below).
Involvement of the heart is thought to result from autoimmune cross-reactivity between bacterial
and cardiac antigens. Pathologically, carditis (cardiac inf ammation) aff icts all layers of the heart
(pericardium, myocardium, and endocardium). Histopathologic examination may demonstrate
Aschoff bodies, areas of focal fibrinoid necrosis surrounded by inf ammatory cells (see Figure) that
later resolve to form fibrous scar tissue. During the acute episode, carditis may cause tachycardia,
impaired ventricular contractility, a pericardial friction rub, and transient heart murmurs that ref ect
turbulent f ow across inf amed valve leaf ets. Treatment of the acute episode includes high-dose
aspirin to reduce inf ammation and penicillin to eliminate residual streptococcal infection.
The most important sequela of ARF is chronic rheumatic heart disease (RHD) characterized
by permanent deformity and impairment of one or more cardiac valves. Symptoms of valvular
dysfunction, however, do not manifest until 10 to 30 years after ARF has subsided. This latency
period may be shorter with more aggressive disease sometimes observed in developing countries.
RHD affects the mitral valve in almost all cases, the aortic valve in 20% to 30%, and rarely the
tricuspid valve as well. Stenosis and/or regurgitation of each valve can result.
Management of RHD includes prophylaxis against recurrent streptococcal infection and
treatment of the chronic valve lesions. Recurrences of ARF can incite further cardiac damage, so
individuals with ARF should receive preventive low-dose penicillin prophylaxis at least until early
adulthood, by which time exposure and susceptibility to streptococcal infections have diminished.
Figure. Histopathology of an Aschoff body in acute rheumatic carditis. Mononuclear
inf ammatory cells surround a center of focal necrosis. (Gourtesy of Dr Frederick J. Schoen,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
(continues on page 194)
194 chapter 8
Ce nl
BOX8-1 Rheumatic Fever (continued)
Citeria for Diagnosis of Rheumatic Fever
Mgjor criteria
Carditis (inf ammation of all three heart layers)
Meratory arthritis (mainly large joints)
Sydenham chorea (involuntary movements)
Erythema marginatum (skin rash with advancing edge and clearing center)
Subcutaneous nodules
Minor criteria
Arthralgias
Fever
Hevated acute-phase reactants (ESR, CRP)
Prolonged PR interval on electrocardiogram
Evidence of group A streptococcal infection
Antistreptolysin O antibodies
Positive throat culture or rapid antigen test
eC

‘Diagnosis requires evidence of streptococcal infection and either: two major criteria or one major plus two

minor criteria.

ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; CRP, Greactive protein.
endocarditis with large vegetations that obstruct the valve orifice, and rare congenital stenosis
of the valve.

Pathology
Acute and recurrent inf ammation produces the typical pathologic features of MS due to rheu-
matic heart disease. These include fibrous thickening and calcification of the valve leaf ets,
fusion of the commissures (the borders where the leaf ets meet), and thickening and shorten-
ing of the chordae tendineae.

Pathophysiology
In early diastole in the normal heart, the mitral valve opens and blood f ows freely from the
left atrium (LA) into the left ventricle (LV), such that there is a negligible pressure difference
between the two chambers. In MS, however, there is obstruction to blood fow across the
valve such that emptying of the LA is impeded and there is an abnormal pressure gradient
between the LA and LV (Figs. 8-1 and 8-2). As a result, the left atrial pressure increases.
Hemodynamic changes become apparent when the cross-sectional area of the valve, normally
4 to 6 cm’, is reduced to less than 2 cm’.

The high left atrial pressure in MS is transmitted retrograde to the pulmonary circulation,
resulting in increased pulmonary venous and capillary pressures (see Fig. 8-1). This elevation
of hydrostatic pressure in the pulmonary vasculature may cause transudation of plasma into
the lung interstitium and alveoli. The patient may therefore experience dyspnea and other
symptoms of heart failure (as described in Chapter 9). In severe cases, significant elevation
of pulmonary venous pressure leads to the opening of collateral channels between the pul-
monary and bronchial veins. Subsequently, an engorged bronchial vein may rupture into a
bronchus, resulting in hemoptysis (coughing up blood).
Valvular Heart Disease 195
Elevated pulmonary
and right heart pressures
BZ Wwe
Aorta C/A T Pressure
T Volume
LA
HGURE 8-1. Pathophysiology of |
mitral stenosis. In the normal heart,
blood f ows freely from the left atrium LV
(LA) into the left ventricle (LV) during
diastole (blue arrow). In mitral stenosis,
there is obstruction to LA emptying
(red arrow). Thus, the LA pressure
increases, which in turn elevates
pulmonary and right heart pressures. Normal (dias tole) Mitral s tenos is
The elevation of left atrial pressure in MS can result in two distinct forms of pulmonary
hypertension: passive and reactive. Most patients with MS exhibit passive pulmonary hyper-
tension, related to the backward transmission of the elevated LA pressure into the pulmonary
vasculature as described in the previous paragraph. This actually represents an “obligatory”
increase in pulmonary artery pressure that preserves forward f ow in the setting of increased
left atrial and pulmonary venous pressures. Additionally, approximately 40% of patients with
MS demonstrate reactive pulmonary hypertension with medial hypertrophy and intimal fibro-
sis of the pulmonary arterioles. Reactive pulmonary hypertension initially serves a “benefi-
cial” role because the increased arteriolar resistance impedes blood f ow into the engorged
pulmonary capillary bed and thus reduces capillary hydrostatic pressure (thereby “protect-
ing” the pulmonary capillaries from even higher pressures). However, this benefit is at the
cost of decreased blood fow through the pulmonary vasculature and elevation of the right-
sided heart pressures, as the right ventricle pumps against the increased resistance. Chronic
ECG | A
110
DB 90
-
HGURE 8-2. Hemodynamic prof le &
of mitral stenosis. The left atrial(LA) £ 7
pressure is elevated, and there is a @
pressure gradient (shaded area) between 3 50
the LAand left ventricle (LV) during 8
diastole. Gmpare with schematic of a 0 LA
normal tracing (see Fig. 2-1). Abnormal \
heart sounds are present: there is 10
a diastolic opening snap (OS) that weLV
corresponds to the opening of the mitral
valve, followed by a decrescendo murmur. Time
There is an accentuation of the murmur
just before S, owing to the increased Heart
pressure gradient when the LA contracts sounds | | im | |
in patients in sinus rhythm (presystolic Ninn. ll
accentuation). S{ S2 OS S} Se
196 Chapter 8
elevation of right ventricular pressure leads to hypertrophy and dilatation of that chamber and
ultimately to right-sided heart failure.

Chronic pressure overload of the LA in MS leads to left atrial enlargement. Left atrial
dilatation stretches the atrial conduction fibers and may disrupt the integrity of the cardiac con-
duction system, resulting in atrial f brillation (a rapid irregular heart rhythm; see Chapter 12).
Atrial fibrillation contributes to a decline in cardiac output in MS because the increased heart
rate shortens diastole. This reduces the time available for blood to f ow across the obstructed
mitral valve to fill the LV, and, at the same time, further augments the elevated left atrial pres-
sure. In addition, with atrial fibrillation, there is a loss of the late diastolic atrial contraction
that normally contributes to LV filling.

The relative stagnation of blood fow in the dilated LA in MS, especially when combined
with the development of atrial fibrillation, predisposes to intra-atrial thrombus formation.
Thromboemboli to the brain and other organs may follow, leading to devastating complica-
tions such as cerebrovascular occlusion (stroke). Thus, MS patients who develop atrial fibril-
lation require chronic anticoagulation therapy.

The consequences of MS primarily affect the left atrium and the pulmonary vasculature,
as described above. Left ventricular pressures are usually normal, but impaired filling of the
chamber through the stenotic valve may reduce LV stroke volume and cardiac output.

Cinical Manifestations and Evaluation

Presentation
The natural history of MS is variable. Survival exceeds 80% in asymptomatic or minimally symp-
tomatic patients at 10 years. However, the 10-year survival of untreated patients after onset of
symptoms is only 50-60%. Longevity is much more limited for patients with advanced symptoms
and is dismal for those who develop significant pulmonary hypertension, with a mean survival of
less than 3 years.

The clinical presentation of MS depends largely on the degree of reduction of the valve
area. The more severe the stenosis, the greater the symptoms related to elevation of left
atrial and pulmonary venous pressures. The earliest manifestations are those of dyspnea and
reduced exercise capacity. In mild MS, dyspnea may be absent at rest; however, it develops
on exertion as LA pressure rises with the exercise-induced increase in blood f ow through the
heart and faster heart rate (i.e., decreased diastolic filling time). Other conditions and activi-
ties that augment heart rate and cardiac blood f ow and precipitate or exacerbate symptoms
of MS include fever, anemia, hyperthyroidism, pregnancy, rapid arrhythmias such as atrial
fibrillation, emotional stress, and sexual intercourse.

With more severe MS (i.e., a smaller valve area), dyspnea occurs even at rest. Increasing
fatigue and more severe signs of pulmonary congestion, such as orthopnea and paroxys-
mal nocturnal dyspnea (described in Chapter 9), occur. With advanced MS and pulmonary
hypertension, signs of right-sided heart failure ensue, including jugular venous distention,
hepatomegaly, ascites, and peripheral edema. Compression of the recurrent laryngeal nerve
by an enlarged pulmonary artery or LA may cause hoarseness (known as Ortner syndrome).

Less often, the diagnosis of MS is heralded by one of its complications: atrial fibrillation,
thromboembolism, infective endocarditis, or hemoptysis, as described in the earlier section
on Pathophysiology.

Examination
On examination, there are several typical findings of MS. Palpation of the chest may reveal
a right ventricular “tap” in patients with increased right ventricular pressure. Auscultation
discloses a loud S, (the first heart sound, which is associated with mitral valve closure) in the
early stages of the disease. The increased S, results from the high pressure gradient between
Valvular Heart Disease 197
the atrium and ventricle, which keeps the mobile portions of the mitral valve leaf ets widely
separated throughout diastole; at the onset of systole, ventricular contraction abruptly slams
the leaf ets together from a relatively wide position, causing the closure sound to be more
prominent (see Chapter 2). In late stages of the disease, the intensity of S, may normalize or
become reduced as the valve leaf ets thicken, calcify, and become less mobile.

A main feature of auscultation in MS is a high-pitched “opening snap” (OS) that follows
S,. The OS is thought to result from the sudden tensing of the chordae tendineae and ste-
notic leaf ets on opening of the abnormal valve. The interval between S, and the OS relates
inversely to the severity of MS. That is, the more severe the MS, the higher the LA pressure
and the earlier the valve is forced open in diastole. The OS is followed by a low-frequency
decrescendo murmur (termed diastolic rumble) caused by turbulent f ow across the stenotic
valve during diastole (see Fig. 8-2). The duration, but not the intensity, of the diastolic mur-
mur relates to the severity of MS. The more severe the stenosis, the longer it takes for the
LA to empty and for the gradient between the LA and LV to dissipate. Near the end of dias-
tole, contraction of the LA in patients in sinus rhythm causes the pressure gradient between
the LA and LV to rise again (see Fig. 8-2); therefore, the murmur brief y becomes louder at
that time (termed presystolic accentuation). This final accentuation of the murmur does not
occur if atrial fibrillation has developed because there is no effective atrial contraction in that
situation.

Murmurs caused by other valve lesions are often found concurrently in patients with MS.
For example, mitral regurgitation (discussed later in this chapter) frequently coexists with MS.
Additionally, right-sided heart failure caused by severe MS may induce tricuspid regurgitation
as a result of right ventricular enlargement. A diastolic decrescendo murmur along the left
sternal border may be present owing to coexistent aortic regurgitation (because of rheumatic
involvement of the aortic leaf ets) or pulmonic regurgitation (because of MS-induced pulmo-
nary hypertension).

The electrocardiogram in MS routinely shows left atrial enlargement and, if pulmonary
hypertension has developed, right ventricular hypertrophy. Atrial fibrillation may be pres-
ent. The chest radiograph reveals left atrial enlargement, pulmonary vascular redistribution,
interstitial edema, and Kerley B lines resulting from edema within the pulmonary septae (see
Chapter 3). With the development of pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular enlargement
and prominence of the pulmonary arteries appear.

Echocardiography is of major diagnostic value in MS. Structural findings include thick-
ened mitral leafets with abnormal fusion of their commissures and restricted separation
during diastole. The degree of left atrial enlargement can be quantified, and if present, intra-
atrial thrombus may be visualized. The mitral valve area can be measured directly on cross-
sectional views or calculated from Doppler velocity measurements (a technique known as
the “diastolic pressure half-time”). Patients can be stratified into stages of disease severity
based partly on the mitral valve area. A normal mitral valve orifice measures between 4 and
6 cm’. Current guidelines define clinically important “severe” MS as a valve area <1.5 cm’, a
state that is typically accompanied by LA enlargement and elevated pulmonary artery systolic
pressure. A valve area <1.0 cm? is termed “very severe” MS. If the findings determined by
echocardiography seem milder than the patient’s history and examination suggest, an exercise
test with accompanying Doppler assessment, or cardiac catheterization may be warranted to
further define hemodynamic measurements.

Treatment
Salt intake restriction and diuretic therapy may improve symptoms due to vascular conges-
tion. Heart rate slowing agents, such as B-blockers or nondihydropyridine calcium channel
blockers (e.g., diltiazem or verapamil, see Chapter 17), increase diastolic LV filling time and
therefore ease symptoms that occur during exercise. These drugs, or digoxin, are similarly
useful to slow the ventricular rate in patients with accompanying rapid atrial fibrillation.
198 chapter 8
Anticoagulant therapy to prevent thromboembolism is recommended for MS patients with
atrial fibrillation, or an identified atrial thrombus, or prior embolic events.

Percutaneous or surgical valve interventions are the only treatments that alter the natural
history of MS and are indicated in patients with severe, symptomatic MS. Percutaneous balloon
mitral valvuloplasty is the treatment of choice in appropriately selected patients (those without
advanced anatomic deformity of the valve, mitral regurgitation, or left atrial thrombus). During
this procedure, a balloon catheter is advanced from the femoral vein into the right atrium,
across the atrial septum (by intentionally puncturing the interatrial septum), and through the
narrowed mitral valve orifice. The balloon is then rapidly inf ated, thereby “cracking” open the
fused commissures. The short- and long-term results of this procedure are typically excellent
and compare favorably with those of surgical treatment in anatomically appropriate patients.
In young adults with the most suitable anatomy for the procedure, the event-free survival rate
approaches 80% to 90% over 3 to 7 years of follow-up. Approximately 5% of patients undergo-
ing balloon mitral valvuloplasty are left with a residual atrial septal defect due to the transseptal
puncture. Less frequent complications include cerebral emboli at the time of valvuloplasty, car-
diac perforation by the catheter, or the unintentional creation of substantial mitral regurgitation.

Open mitral valve commissurotomy (an operation in which the stenotic commissures are
separated under direct visualization) may be undertaken in patients for whom percutaneous
balloon valvuloplasty is not feasible or successful. It is effective in relieving obstruction, and
restenosis occurs in fewer than 20% of patients over 10 to 20 years of follow-up. Perioperative
mortality rates are low (2%). Mitral valve replacement is considered in patients who are not
appropriate candidates for balloon valvuloplasty or open commissurotomy.

Mitral Regurgitation
Etiology
The mitral valve apparatus is a complex structure composed of an annulus, two leaf ets,
chordae tendineae, and papillary muscles, supported by the adjacent myocardium to which
the annulus and papillary muscles are attached (Fig. 8-3). Disruption to the structural integ-
rity of any of these components or their coordinated action can result in abnormal closure
of the valve during systole, with ensuing mitral regurgitation (MR). MR is categorized as
Mitral annulus
¢ Annular calcification
Leaflets
¢e Myxomatous degeneration (“MVP”)
«Rheumatic disease
¢ Endocarditis
¢ SAM (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy)
Chordae tendineae
¢ Rupture (idiopathic)
¢ Endocarditis
Papillary muscles
¢ Dysfunction or rupture
HGURE8-3. The mitral valve
Left ventricle apparatus and associated common
* Cavity dilatation etiologies of mitral regurgitation.
MVP, mitral valve prolapse; SAM
systolic anterior motion.
Valvular Heart Disease 199
primary if it is due to a structural defect of one or more of the valve components, or second-
ary if the valve is structurally normal, but regurgitation instead results from left ventricular
enlargement. In the latter case, MR arises from abnormal coaptation and closure of the mitral
leaf ets owing to dilatation of the mitral annulus by the enlarged LV, and/or spatial separa-
tion of the papillary muscles, which places traction of the chordae and attached leaf ets.
Furthermore, depending on the nature of the valvular insult, MR can present as an “acute” or
“chronic” condition, with different pathophysiologic consequences.

Most cases of acute MR are primary in nature and result from sudden damage to compo-
nents of the valve apparatus. For example, rupture of an infarcted papillary muscle can occur
within days of an acute ST-segment elevation MI, often resulting in severe MR (see Chapter 7).
Acute MR due to sudden rupture of chordae tendineae can result from infective endocarditis,
blunt trauma to the chest, or from degeneration of the chordae owing to connective tissue
disorders such as Marfan syndrome.

Chronic MRhas multiple primary causes, including myxomatous degeneration of the valve,
in which “foppy” leafets allow regurgitation to occur by bowing excessively into the LA
during systole (termed “mitral valve prolapse” and described in the next section). Other
causes of chronic primary MR include rheumatic deformity of the valve, congenital valve
defects, and extensive calcification of the mitral annulus, which prevents normal movement
of the valve leaf ets, thus interfering with valve closure.

Secondary (also termed “functional”) chronic MR results from LV enlargement and/or
dysfunction as described above, as may occur with prior myocardial infarction, chronic
ischemic heart disease, or dilated cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 10).

Pathophysiology
In MR, a portion of the left ventricular stroke volume is ejected backward into the low-
pressure LA during systole (Fig. 8-4). As a result, the forward cardiac output (into the
aorta) is less than the LV’s total output (forward fow plus backward leak). Therefore, the
Pulmonary
edema C—O
High LA elevated
WS LA \S pressure \S pressure
Normal Acute mitral Chronic mitral
(sys tole) regurgitation regurgitation
HGURE 8-4. Pathophysiology of mitral regurgitation. In the normal heart, left ventricular (LV) contraction during
systole forces blood exclusively through the aortic valve into the aorta (green arrow); the closed mitral valve prevents
regurgitation into the left atrium (LA). In mitral regurgitation (MR), a portion of LVoutput is forced backward into the
LA (red arrows), so that forward cardiac output into the aorta is reduced. In acute MR, the LA is of normal size and is
relatively noncompliant, such that the LA pressure rises signif cantly and pulmonary edema may result. In chronic MR, the
LAhas enlarged and is more compliant, so that the LA pressure is less elevated and pulmonary congestive symptoms are
less common. The LVenlargement and the eccentric hypertrophy result from the chronically elevated volume load.
200 chapter 8
direct consequences of MR include (1) an elevation of left atrial volume and pressure, (2) a
reduction of forward cardiac output, and (3) a volume-related stress on the LV because the
regurgitant volume returns to the LV in diastole along with the normal pulmonary venous
return. To meet normal circulatory needs and to eject the additional volume, LV stroke volume
must rise. This increase is accomplished by the Frank—Starling mechanism (see Chapter 9),
whereby the elevated LV diastolic volume augments myofiber stretch and stroke volume. The
hemodynamic consequences of MR vary depending on the degree of regurgitation and how
long it has been present.
The severity of MR and the ratio of forward cardiac output to backward f ow are dictated
by five factors: (1) the size of the mitral orifice during regurgitation, (2) the systolic pressure
gradient between the LV and LA, (3) the systemic vascular resistance opposing forward LV
blood f ow, (4) left atrial compliance, and (5) the duration of regurgitation with each systolic
contraction.
The regurgitant fraction in MR is defined as follows:
Volume of MR
Total LV stroke volume
This ratio rises whenever the resistance to aortic outf ow is increased (i.e., blood fol-
lows the path of least resistance). For example, high systemic blood pressure or the pres-
ence of aortic stenosis will increase the regurgitant fraction. The extent to which left
atrial pressure rises in response to the regurgitant volume
is determined by the left atrial compliance. Compliance is
ECG A ~ a measure of the chamber’s pressure—volume relationship,
ref ecting the ease or difficulty with which the chamber can
be filled (see Table 9.1).
110 In acute MR, left atrial compliance undergoes little imme-
diate change. Because the LA is a relatively stiff chamber, its
90 Tally pressure increases substantially when it is suddenly exposed
LV wave to a regurgitant volume load (see Fig. 8-4). This elevated pres-
70 sure is transmitted backward to the pulmonary circulation and
can result in rapid pulmonary congestion and edema, a medi-
50 cal emergency.
In acute MR, the LA pressure, or the pulmonary capillary
30 wedge pressure (an indirect measurement of LA pressure; see
LA Chapter 3), demonstrates a prominent v wave (often referred
10 to as a “cv” wave when it merges with the preceding c wave),
ref ecting the increased LA filling during systole (Fig. 8-5).
Time Additionally, as in MS, pulmonary artery and right-heart pres-
Heart sures passively rise.
sounds: Li In acute MR, the LV accommodates the increased volume
S, S, load returning from the LA according to the Frank—Starling
FIGURE8-5. Hemodynamic prof le of relationship. The result is a compensatory increase in the
mitral regurgitation (MR). A large systolic v LV stroke volume and ejection fraction, such that at the
wave is noted in the left atrial (LA) pressure end of each systolic contraction, LV volume remains normal
tracing. A holosystolic murmur is present in in the nonfailing heart. Systolic emptying of the ventricle
chronic MR (as shown here), beginning at the is facilitated in MR by the reduced total impedance to LV
first heart sound (S;) and continuing through —¢gntraction (i.e., the afterload is lower than normal), since
the second heart sound (S2). In acute severe portion of the LV output is directed into the relatively
MR, the systolic murmur may actually have . . .
a decrescendo quality, ref ecting rapid low-impedance LA, rather than into the higher-pressure
equilibration of LVand LA pressures owing aorta.
to the relatively low LA compliance. ECG In contrast to the acute situation, the more gradual develop-
electrocardiogram; LV left ventricle. ment of chronic MR permits the LA to undergo compensatory
Valvular Heart Disease 201
changes that lessen the effects of regurgitation on the pulmonary circulation (see Fig. 8-4).
In particular, the LA dilates and its compliance increases such that the chamber is able to
accommodate a larger volume without a substantial increase in pressure. Left atrial dilatation
is therefore adaptive in that it prevents significant increases in pulmonary vascular pressures.
However, this adaptation occurs at the cost of reduced forward cardiac output, because the
compliant LA becomes a preferred low-pressure “sink” for left ventricular ejection, compared
with the aorta. Consequently, as progressively larger fractions of blood regurgitate into the
LA, symptoms of chronic MR include those of low forward cardiac output (e.g., weakness
and fatigue). In addition, chronic left atrial dilatation predisposes to the development of atrial
fibrillation.
Thus, major pathophysiologic differences between acute and chronic MR relate to a great
extent to left atrial size and compliance (see Fig. 8-4):
Acute MR: Normal LA size and compliance — High LA pressure — High pulmonary
venous pressure — Pulmonary congestion and edema
Chronic MR: Increased LA size and compliance — Relatively normal LA and pulmonary
venous pressures, but decreased forward cardiac output
In chronic MR, the LV also undergoes gradual compensatory dilatation in response to
the volume load through eccentric hypertrophy (see Chapter 9). Compared with acute MR,
the resulting increased ventricular compliance accommodates the augmented filling vol-
ume with relatively normal diastolic pressures. Forward output in chronic MR is preserved
to near-normal levels for an extended period by maintaining a higher stroke volume via
the Frank—Starling mechanism. Over years, however, chronic volume overload results in
deterioration of systolic ventricular function, a decline in forward output, and symptoms
of heart failure.
Ginical Manifestations and Evaluation
Presentation
As should be clear from the pathophysiology discussion, patients with acute MR usually
present with symptoms of pulmonary edema (see Chapter 9). The symptoms of chronic MR
are predominantly due to low cardiac output, especially during exertion, and include fatigue
and weakness. Patients with severe MR or those who develop LV contractile dysfunction often
complain of dyspnea, orthopnea, and/or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. In chronic severe
MR, symptoms of right heart failure (e.g., increased abdominal girth, peripheral edema) may
develop as well.
Examination
The physical examination of a patient with chronic MR typically reveals an apical holosys-
tolic (also termed pansystolic) murmur that often radiates to the axilla. The holosystolic
nature of the murmur ref ects the continued pressure gradient between LV and LA throughout
systole (see Fig. 8-5). This description, accurate for rheumatic MR, has several exceptions.
For example, in patients with isolated posterior mitral leaf et prolapse, the regurgitant jet is
directed anteriorly. In this setting, the murmur may instead radiate to the base of the heart
and could be confused with the murmur of aortic stenosis (AS) in that location. Fortunately,
the distinction between the systolic murmur of MR and that of AS can be made by simple
bedside maneuvers. If the patient is instructed to clench his/her fists and forearms, systemic
vascular resistance will increase and the murmur of MR will intensify, whereas the murmur
of AS will not. Even more helpful in this distinction is the effect of varying cardiac cycle
length (the time between consecutive heart beats) on the intensity of the systolic murmur. In
a patient with atrial fibrillation or with frequent premature beats, the LV fills to a degree that
202 (chapter 8

directly depends on the preceding cycle length (i.e., a longer cycle length permits greater left
ventricular filling). The systolic murmur of AS becomes louder in the beat after a long cycle
length because even small pressure gradients are amplified as more blood is ejected across
the reduced aortic orifice. In MR, however, the intensity of the murmur does not vary signifi-
cantly because the change in the LV-LA pressure gradient is minimally affected by alterations
in the cycle length. In addition to the systolic murmur, a common finding in chronic MR is the
presence of an S;, which ref ects increased volume returning to the LV in early diastole (see
Chapter 2). Additionally, in chronic MR, the cardiac apical impulse is often laterally displaced
toward the axilla because of LV enlargement.

In patients with severe acute MR, the character of the systolic murmur is often different,
occurring in early to mid systole with a decrescendo quality. The length and quality of the
murmur are dictated by the systolic pressure gradient between the left ventricle and the rela-
tively noncompliant left atrium. That is, as the LA pressure rises in systole in acute MR, the
LV and LA pressures quickly equalize, thus truncating the murmur. Patients with acute MR
often display signs of pulmonary congestion.

The chest radiograph may display pulmonary edema in acute MR but in chronic
asymptomatic MR more likely demonstrates left ventricular and atrial enlargement, with-
out pulmonary congestion. Calcification of the mitral annulus may be seen if that is the
cause of the MR. In chronic MR, the electrocardiogram typically demonstrates left atrial
enlargement and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography can often iden-
tify the structural cause of MR and assess its severity. Cardiac catheterization is used to
identify accompanying coronary artery disease and left ventriculography can confirm
MR severity. The characteristic hemodynamic finding is a large v wave in the pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure tracing (ref ective of LA pressure—see Chapter 3). The v wave
becomes less conspicuous, however, with progressive LA dilatation and greater compli-
ance over time.

Natural History and Treatment

Acute severe MR is a surgical emergency with a poor prognosis, even with appropriate
treatment, with a 30-day mortality rate of 20% to 25%. The natural history of chronic
MR is related to its underlying cause. For example, in RHD, the course is one of very slow
progression with a 15-year survival rate of 70%. On the other hand, abrupt worsening
of chronic MR of any cause can occur with superimposed complications, such as rup-
ture of chordae tendineae or endocarditis, and can result in an immediate life-threatening
situation.

The treatment of acute MR almost always requires surgical intervention. Pharmacologic
therapy is useful only to stabilize patients until surgery. For example, intravenous nitroprus-
side is a potent vasodilator that decreases arterial resistance, thereby augmenting forward
fow and diminishing the regurgitant volume. In this way, cardiac output and pulmonary con-
gestion may improve at least transiently. Surgical intervention consists of either mitral valve
repair (reconstruction of the native valve as described below) or replacement, depending on
the underlying cause and valve anatomy.

Management of chronic MR depends on the etiology. In chronic primary MR, the continu-
ous left ventricular volume overload can slowly impair left ventricular contractile function,
ultimately, resulting in heart failure. Medical treatment with vasodilators is less useful than in
acute MR and has not been shown to delay the need for valve surgery in chronic MR. Surgical
intervention should be undertaken in symptomatic patients, or at the earliest sign of LV con-
tractile dysfunction on imaging studies (e.g., a fall in EF to < 60% by echocardiography) even
before symptoms develop. Surgical intervention is also sometimes recommended for patients
Valvular Heart Disease 203
with chronic asymptomatic severe primary MR with recent onset atrial fibrillation or findings
of pulmonary hypertension.

Surgical options for chronic MR include mitral valve repair or replacement. Mitral valve
repair is the preferred operative technique when feasible, and involves the reconstruction of
parts of the valve responsible for the regurgitation. For example, a perforated leaf et may be
patched with transplanted autologous pericardium, or ruptured chordae may be reattached
to a papillary muscle. Mitral repair preserves native valve tissue, and eliminates many of
the problems associated with artificial valves described later in the chapter. In patients who
undergo repair, the postoperative survival rate appears to be better than the natural history of
MR and has provided impetus toward earlier surgical intervention. Operative mortality rates
for unselected patients with MR in the Society for Thoracic Surgeons database are less than
2% for mitral valve repair and 5% to 7% for mitral valve replacement. These rates are higher
if concurrent coronary artery bypass grafting is performed. In general, mitral valve repair
is more often appropriate for younger patients with myxomatous involvement of the mitral
valve, and mitral replacement is more often undertaken in older patients with more extensive
valve pathology.

In patients with chronic, severe, symptomatic primary MR who are at prohibitive oper-
ative risk, a recently developed technique of transcatheter mitral valve repair can be
considered. In this procedure, a catheter is advanced percutaneously from the femoral
vein into the right side of the heart, then into the left atrium via a puncture through the
interatrial septum (similar to mitral balloon valvuloplasty), and advanced into the left
ventricle. A mechanical clip is then deployed, which grasps and tethers the anterior and
posterior mitral leaf ets together at one location and is left in place, reducing the size of
the regurgitant orifice. The procedure has been shown to be safe and effective in prospec-
tive observational studies of high surgical risk patients, with improvement in the sever-
ity of MR and functional status. However, in a randomized trial of percutaneous repair
versus valve surgery for patients with severe primary MR, surgery proved more effective
and remains the intervention of choice is patients who are acceptable candidates for an
operation.

Because chronic, secondary MR is often a result of left ventricular dysfunction, pharma-
cologic rather than mechanical intervention is the mainstay of treatment, using a standard
combination of heart failure medications, including diuretics, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin
receptor blockers, beta-blockers, and aldosterone antagonists (see Chapter 9). Surgical inter-
vention is considered only when a patient with chronic, severe secondary MR has persistent
symptoms despite optimal medical therapy.

Mitral Valve Prolapse

Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is characterized by abnormal billowing of a portion of one or
both mitral leafets into the LA during ventricular systole, and is frequently accompanied
by MR (Fig. 8-6). Other names for this condition include f oppy mitral valve, myxomatous
mitral valve, and Barlow syndrome. MVP may be inherited as a primary autosomal dominant
disorder with variable penetrance, or it may accompany certain connective tissue diseases,
such as Marfan syndrome or Ehlers—Danlos syndrome. Pathologically, the valve leaf ets, par-
ticularly the posterior leaf et, are enlarged, and the normal dense collagen and elastin matrix
of the valvular fibrosa is fragmented and replaced with loose myxomatous connective tissue.
Additionally, in more severe lesions, elongated or ruptured chordae, annular enlargement, or
thickened leaf ets may be present. A recent rigorous echocardiographic study indicated that
MVP occurs in about 2% of the population and is more common among women, especially
those who are thin and lean.
204 (chapter 8
Pa MVP is often asymptomatic but affected individu-
Aorta an , Bx als may describe chest pain or palpitations because
a ae, | xt of associated arrhythmias. Most often it is identified
| \y on routine physical examination by the presence of a
; ’ . LA midsystolic click and late systolic murmur heard best
\ row J vs at the cardiac apex. The midsystolic click is thought
\ ~ Taher” to correspond to the sudden tensing of the involved
iy T . mitral leaf et or chordae tendineae as the leaf et is
Z We il? forced back toward the LA; the murmur corresponds
% | to regurgitant fow through the incompetent valve.
RV . .
é a The click and murmur are characteristically altered
lv during dynamic auscultation at the bedside: maneu-
F vers that increase the volume of the LV (e.g., sudden
squatting, which increases venous return) place trac-
tion of the chordae tendineae, limiting and delaying
FIGURE 8-6. Mitral valve prolapse. Long-axis view the occurrence of prolapse in systole and cause the
of the left ventricle (LV) demonstrates a myxomatous, . .
elongated appearance of the mitral valve with prolapse click and MUTE to occur later (Le., turther irom
of the posterior leaf et (arrow) into the left atrium S). Conversely, if the volume of blood in the LV is
(LA). RY right ventricle. (From Schoen FJ, Mtchell decreased (e.g., on sudden standing), prolapse occurs
RN. The heart. In: Kumar V Abbas A, Aster JC eds. earlier and the click and murmur move closer to §,.
Robbins and tran Pathologic Basis of Disease. 9th ed. Confirmation of the diagnosis is obtained by echo-
Philadelphia, PA: Hsevier Saunders; 2015.) cardiography, which demonstrates posterior displace-
ment of a portion of one or both mitral leaf ets into
the LA during systole. The electrocardiogram and chest radiograph are usually normal unless
chronic MR has resulted in left atrial and left ventricular enlargement.

The clinical course of MVP is most often benign. Treatment consists of reassurance
about the usually good prognosis and monitoring for the development of progressive MR.
Occasionally, rupture of myxomatous chordae in this condition can cause sudden, severe
regurgitation and pulmonary edema. Other potential complications include infective endo-
carditis, peripheral emboli owing to microthrombus formation on the redundant valve tissue,
and atrial or ventricular arrhythmias.

AORTIC VALVE DISEASE

Aortic Stenosis

Etiology
Among adult patients, there are three major causes of aortic stenosis (AS): (1) degenera-
tive calcification of a previously normal trileaf et aortic valve, (2) calcification of a congeni-
tally bicuspid aortic valve, and (3) rheumatic aortic valve disease. Degenerative disease of a
trileaf et valve shares many pathologic features in common with atherosclerosis, as described
below. Bicuspid aortic valves are present in 1% to 2% of the population (with men affected
more commonly than women) and such patients typically develop signs of severe valve
disease about a decade earlier than patients with the trileafet, degenerative type of AS.
Rheumatic aortic valve disease is now uncommon in developed countries. It is nearly always
accompanied by rheumatic involvement of the mitral valve.

Pathology
The pathologic appearance in AS is dependent on its etiology. Degenerative, calcific AS
results from a dynamic process of endothelial dysfunction, lipid accumulation, inf ammation,
Valvular Heart Disease 205
and alteration of signaling pathways that appears similar to
atherogenesis. Over time, valvular myofibroblasts differen- Aorta a
tiate into osteoblasts and deposit calcium hydroxyapatite 14
crystals, resulting in leaf et thickening and stiffening. This
process is likely exacerbated by abnormal shear forces, as
occur with congenitally deformed (bicuspid) valves, and
could explain the earlier presentation of such patients. As
with atherosclerosis, risk factors for calcific, degenerative a
AS include dyslipidemia, smoking, and hypertension (see
Chapter 5).
In rheumatic AS, endocardial inf ammation leads to orga-
nization and fibrosis of the valve and ultimately to fusion of
the commissures and formation of calcified masses within the HIGURES-7. Pathophysiology
aortic cusps. of aortic stenosis (AS). The
impediment to left ventricular
(LV) outf ow in AS results in
7 elevated LVpressures and
Pathophysiology secondary concentric ventricular
In AS, blood f ow across the aortic valve is impeded during hypertrophy.
systole (Fig. 8-7). Progressive reduction of the aortic valve
area requires elevation of left ventricular systolic pressure to overcome the impedance to f ow
to drive blood into the aorta (Fig. 8-8).
Since the obstruction in AS develops gradually, the LV is able to compensate by undergo-
ing concentric hypertrophy in response to the increased pressure load. Initially, such hyper-
trophy serves an important role in reducing LV wall stress
(remember from Chapter 6 that wall stress = (P x r) + 2h,
in which h represents wall thickness). Over time, however,
150 it also reduces the compliance of the ventricle. The resulting
{ \ elevation of diastolic LV pressure causes the LA to hypertro-
130 fe) phy, which facilitates filling of the “stiffened” LV. Whereas
10 f left atrial contraction contributes only a small portion of
Lh the left ventricular stroke volume in normal individuals,
90 PN it may provide more than 25% of the stroke volume to the
stiffened LV in AS patients. Thus, left atrial hypertrophy is
70 Aorta Ey beneficial, and the loss of effective atrial contraction (e.g.,
/ development of atrial fibrillation) can cause marked clinical
°0 deterioration.
30 Three major manifestations occur in patients with
advanced AS: (1) angina, (2) exertional syncope, and (3)
10 heart failure, all of which can be explained on the basis
- of the underlying pathophysiology. Each manifestation, in
Time order, heralds an increasingly ominous prognosis (Table 8-1).
Heart AS may result in angina because it creates a substan-
sounds: | stiffly tial imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and
Sy Sp demand. Myocardial oxygen demand is increased in two
ways. First, the muscle mass of the hypertrophied LV
FIGURE 8-8. Hemodynamic prof le of aortic is increased, requiring greater-than-normal perfusion.
stenosis. Asystolic pressure gradient (shaded Second, wall stress is increased because of the elevated
area) is present between the left ventricle . . we
(LV) and aorta. The second heart sound (S,) is systolic ventricular pressure. In addition, AS reduces myo-
diminished in intensity, and there is a crescendo— cardial oxygen supply because the elevated left ventricular
decrescendo systolic murmur that does not extend diastolic pressure reduces the coronary perfusion pressure
beyond §,. EGG electrocardiogram. gradient between the aorta and the myocardium.
206 Chapter 8

TABLE 8-1

Cinical Symptoms Median Survival

Angina 5 years

Syncope 3 years

Heart failure 2 years
Cee
Derived from Ross J Jz, Braunwald E Aortic stenosis. Greulation. 1968;38(suppl.v):61.

AS may cause syncope during exertion. Although left ventricular hypertrophy allows the
chamber to generate a high pressure and maintain a normal cardiac output at rest, the ven-
tricle cannot significantly increase its cardiac output during exercise because of the fixed
stenotic aortic orifice. In addition, exercise leads to vasodilatation of the peripheral muscle
beds. Thus, the combination of peripheral vasodilatation and the inability to augment cardiac
output contributes to decreased cerebral perfusion pressure and, potentially, loss of con-
sciousness on exertion.

Finally, AS can result in symptoms of heart failure. Early in the course of AS, an abnor-
mally increased left atrial pressure occurs primarily at the end of diastole, when the LA
contracts into the thickened noncompliant LV. As a result, the mean left atrial pressure and
the pulmonary venous pressure are not greatly affected early in the disease. However, with
progression of the stenosis, the LV may develop contractile dysfunction because of the insur-
mountably high afterload, leading to increased left ventricular diastolic volume and pressure.
The accompanying marked elevation of LA and pulmonary venous pressures incites pulmo-
nary alveolar congestion and symptoms of heart failure.

A normal aortic valve has a cross-sectional area of 3 to 4 cm’ and a mean systolic pressure
gradient between the LV and aorta of less than 5 mm Hg. As the valve area decreases in AS,
the pressure gradient rises. When the valve area declines to less than 1.0 cm’, or the mean
pressure gradient increases to greater than 40 mm Hg, a patient is considered to have severe
aortic stenosis and symptoms typically appear.

Cinical Manifestations and Evaluation

Presentation
Angina, syncope, and heart failure may appear after many asymptomatic years of slowly pro-
gressive valve stenosis. Once these symptoms develop, they confer a significantly decreased
survival if invasive correction of AS is not undertaken (see Table 8-1).

Examination
Physical examination often permits accurate detection and estimation of the severity of
AS. The key features of advanced AS include (1) a coarse late-peaking systolic ejection
murmur and (2) a weakened (parvus) and delayed (tardus) upstroke of the carotid
artery owing to the obstructed LV outf ow. Other common findings on cardiac examina-
tion include the presence of an S, (because of atrial contraction into the “stiff LV—see
Chapter 2) and reduced intensity, or complete absence, of the aortic component of the
second heart sound (see Fig. 8-8).
Valvular Heart Disease 207

On the electrocardiogram, left ventricular hypertrophy is common in advanced AS.
Echocardiography is a more sensitive technique to assess LV wall thickness and displays the
abnormal anatomy and reduced excursion of the stenotic valve. The transvalvular pressure
gradient and aortic valve area can be readily calculated by Doppler echocardiography (see
Chapter 3). Cardiac catheterization is sometimes used to confirm the severity of AS and to
define the coronary anatomy, because concurrent coronary artery bypass surgery is often
appropriate at the time of aortic valve replacement in patients with coexisting coronary
disease.

Natural History and Treatment
Mild, asymptomatic AS has a slow rate of progression such that over a 20-year period, only
20% of patients will progress to severe or symptomatic disease. There is no current effective
medical therapy for slowing the rate of progression of aortic stenosis. Since the natural his-
tory of severe, symptomatic, uncorrected AS is very poor (see Table 8-1), effective treatment
requires replacement of the valve.

Aortic valve replacement (AVR) is indicated when a patient with severe AS devel-
ops symptoms, or when there is evidence of progressive LV dysfunction in the absence
of symptoms. The left ventricular ejection fraction almost always increases after valve
replacement, even in patients with impaired preoperative left ventricular function. The
effect of AVR on the natural history of AS is dramatic, as the 10-year survival rate rises to
approximately 60%.

Unlike its successful role in mitral stenosis, percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty has been
disappointing as a sole treatment of adults with calcific AS. Although balloon dilatation of the
aortic valve orifice can fracture calcified masses leading to a slight reduction in valve obstruc-
tion, up to 50% of patients develop restenosis within 6 months. Valvuloplasty is occasionally
used as a temporizing measure in patients too ill to proceed directly to valve replacement, and
can also be an effective treatment in young patients with noncalcified bicuspid AS.

In distinction, for patients with severe AS who are at prohibitive or high risk for cardiac
surgery, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has emerged as a successful treatment
option. This technique involves percutaneous insertion of a specially designed bioprosthetic
valve into the narrowed orifice of the stenotic native valve that is first prepared with balloon
valvuloplasty. TAVR has been validated in randomized prospective trials, and for inoper-
able patients, TAVR outcomes are superior to standard medical therapy. In high surgical risk
patients, TAVR is noninferior to surgical AVR, with similar 1- and 2-year survival rates, though
its use 1s associated with higher risks of periprocedural stroke and paravalvular regurgita-
tion. Longer-term data indicate that the difference in stroke rates equalizes over time, and
it is likely that the use of TAVR will gradually be extended to greater numbers of high and
intermediate surgical risk patients.

Aortic Regurgitation

Etiology
Aortic regurgitation (AR), also termed aortic insuff ciency, may result either from abnormali-
ties of the aortic valve leafets or from dilatation of the aortic root. Primary valvular causes
include: (1) bicuspid aortic valve (in some patients AR predominates over aortic stenosis), (2)
infective endocarditis (due to perforation or erosion of a leaf et), and (3) rheumatic heart dis-
ease (due to thickening and shortening of the aortic valve cusps). Primary aortic root disease
results in AR when the aortic annulus dilates sufficiently to cause separation of the leaf ets,
preventing normal coaptation in diastole. Examples include age-related degenerative dilation
of the aortic root, aortic aneurysms, and aortic dissection, which are described in Chapter 15.
208 Chapter 8

Pathophysiology
In AR, abnormal regurgitation of blood occurs from the aorta into the LV during diastole.
Therefore, with each contraction, the LV must pump that regurgitant volume plus the normal
quantity of blood entering from the LA. Hemodynamic compensation relies on the Frank—
Starling mechanism to augment stroke volume. Factors infuencing the severity of AR are
analogous to those of MR: (1) the size of the regurgitant aortic orifice, (2) the pressure gradi-
ent across the aortic valve during diastole, and (3) the duration of diastole.

As in MR, the hemodynamic abnormalities and symptoms differ in acute and chronic AR
(Fig. 8-9). In acute AR, the LV is of normal size and relatively noncompliant. Thus, the vol-
ume load of regurgitation causes the LV diastolic pressure to rise substantially. The sudden
high diastolic LV pressure is transmitted to the LA and pulmonary circulation, often produc-
ing dyspnea and pulmonary edema. Thus, acute severe AR is usually a surgical emergency,
requiring immediate valve replacement.

In chronic AR, the LV undergoes compensatory adaptation in response to the long-
standing regurgitation. AR subjects the LV primarily to volume overload but also to an
excessive pressure load; therefore, the ventricle compensates through chronic dilatation
(eccentric hypertrophy, with replication of sarcomeres in series—see Chapter 9) and, to a
lesser degree, increased thickness. Over time, the dilatation increases the compliance of
the LV and allows it to accommodate a larger regurgitant volume with less of an increase
in diastolic pressure, reducing the pressure transmitted into the LA and pulmonary circula-
tion. However, by accommodating the large regurgitant volume, the aortic (and therefore
systemic arterial) diastolic pressure drops substantially. The combination of a high LV
stroke volume (and high systolic arterial pressure) with a reduced aortic diastolic pressure
produces a widened pulse pressure (the difference between arterial systolic and dia-
stolic pressures), a hallmark of chronic AR (Fig. 8-10). As a result of the decreased aortic
diastolic pressure, the coronary artery perfusion pressure falls, potentially reducing myo-
cardial oxygen supply. This, coupled with the increase in LV size (which causes increased
wall stress and myocardial oxygen demand), can produce angina, even in the absence of
atherosclerotic coronary disease.

Compensatory left ventricular dilatation and hypertrophy are generally adequate to meet
the demands of chronic AR for many years, during which affected patients are asymp-
tomatic. Gradually, however, progressive remodeling of the LV occurs, resulting in systolic

Pulmonary

congestion Bo Ww HGURE 8-9. Pathophysiology of acute

Aorta _ ie ssure and chronic aortic regurgitation (AR).
\S N-t Abnormal regurgitation of blood from the
Pressure aorta into the left ventricle (LV) is shown
\ Mt & in each schematic drawing (red arrows).
In acute AR, the LVis of normal size
and relatively low compliance, such that
its diastolic pressure rises significantly;
this pressure increase is ref ected back
Pressure to the left atrium (LA) and pulmonary
1 Til ee » vasculature, resulting in pulmonary
congestion or edema. In chronic AR,
adaptive LV and LA enlargement have
occurred, such that a greater volume
of regurgitation can be accommodated
with less of an increase in diastolic LV
Acute aortic Chronic aortic pressure, so that pulmonary congestion is
regurgitation regurgitation less likely. N, normal.
Valvular Heart Disease 209
dysfunction. This causes decreased forward cardiac ECG |
output as well as an increase in left atrial and pul-
monary vascular pressures. At that point, the patient
develops symptoms of heart failure. a
LP 90
: f
ee ° ° E Aorta
Cinical Manifestations and Assessment o.
Presentation B 50
Common symptoms of chronic AR include dyspnea * 30 LV
on exertion, fatigue, decreased exercise tolerance, and 10
the uncomfortable sensation of a forceful heartbeat
associated with the high pulse pressure. Time
Heart
ces | ins,
oo. 34 Se
Examination
; Lo, . HGURE 8-10. Hemodynamic prof le of
Physical examination may show bounding pulses juice regurgitation. During diastole, the
and other stigmata of the widened pulse pressure aortic pressure falls rapidly (arrow), and
(Table 8-2), in addition to a hyperdynamic LV impulse __ left ventricular (LV) pressure rises as blood
and a blowing murmur of AR in early diastole along _ regurgitates from the aorta into the LV A
the left sternal border (see Fig. 8-10). It is best heard diastolic decrescendo murmur, beginning at
with the patient leaning forward, after exhaling. In the second heart sound (S,), corresponds
addition, a low-frequency mid-diastolic rumbling with the abnormal regurgitant fow. BOG
. . electrocardiogram.
sound may be auscultated at the cardiac apex in some
patients with severe AR. Known as the Austin Flint murmur, it is thought to ref ect turbulence
of blood fow through the mitral valve during diastole owing to downward displacement of
the mitral anterior leaf et by the regurgitant stream of AR. It can be distinguished from the
murmur of mitral stenosis by the absence of an OS or presystolic accentuation.

In chronic AR, the chest radiograph shows an enlarged left ventricular silhouette. This
is usually absent in acute AR, in which pulmonary vascular congestion is the more likely
finding. Doppler echocardiography can identify and quantify the degree of AR and often can
identify its cause. Cardiac catheterization with contrast angiography can be obtained for fur-
ther quantification of the degree of AR, and assessment of coexisting coronary artery disease.

Treatment
Data from natural history studies indicate that clinical progression of patients with asymp-
tomatic chronic AR and normal LV contractile function is very slow. Therefore, asymptomatic
patients are monitored with periodic examinations and assessment of LV function, usually by
Name Description
Bisferiens pulse Double systolic impulse in carotid or brachial artery
Qrrigan pulse “Water-hammer” pulses with marked distention and collapse
Hill sign Popliteal systolic pressure more than 60 mm Hg greater than brachial
systolic pressure
Quincke sign @pillary pulsations visible at the lip or proximal nail beds
Tee
210 (chapter 8
serial echocardiography. Patients with asymptomatic severe AR may benefit from afterload
reducing vasodilators (e.g., a calctum channel blocker or an angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor) for treatment of accompanying hypertension. However, such agents do not prolong
the compensated stage of chronic AR.

Symptomatic patients, or asymptomatic patients with severe AR and impaired LV contrac-
tile function (1.e., an ejection fraction less than 0.50), should be offered surgical correction to
prevent progressive deterioration. Studies of such patients show that without surgery, death
usually occurs within 4 years after the development of angina or 2 years after the onset of
heart failure symptoms.

TRICUSPID VALVE DISEASE

Tricuspid Stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) is rare and is usually a long-term consequence of rheumatic fever. The
OS and diastolic murmur of TS are similar to those of MS, but the murmur is heard closer
to the sternum and it intensifies on inspiration because of increased right heart blood fow.
In TS, the neck veins are distended and may show a large a wave as a result of right atrial
contraction against the stenotic tricuspid valve orifice when sinus rhythm is present (see
Chapter 2). Patients may develop abdominal distention and hepatomegaly owing to passive
venous congestion. Percutaneous balloon dilatation or surgical correction (valvuloplasty or
valve replacement) is usually required.

Tricuspid Regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is usually functional rather than structural in nature; that is, it
most commonly results from right ventricular enlargement (e.g., owing to pressure or volume
overload) rather than from primary valve disease. Among patients with rheumatic mitral ste-
nosis, 20% also have significant TR (of whom 80% have functional TR because of pulmonary
hypertension with right ventricular enlargement, and 20% have structural TR resulting from
rheumatic involvement of the tricuspid valve). A rare cause of TR is carcinoid syndrome,
in which a type of neuroendocrine tumor (usually in the small bowel or appendix, with
metastases to the liver) releases serotonin metabolites into the bloodstream. These metabo-
lites are thought to be responsible for the formation of endocardial plaques in the right side
of the heart. Involvement of the tricuspid valve immobilizes the leaf ets, often resulting in
substantial TR and, less often, TS.

The most common physical signs of TR are prominent v waves in the jugular veins
(see Chapter 2) and a pulsatile liver because of regurgitation of right ventricular blood into
the systemic veins. The systolic murmur of TR is heard at the lower left sternal border. It is
often soft but becomes louder on inspiration. Doppler echocardiography readily detects TR
and can quantify it. The treatment of functional TR is directed at the conditions responsible
for the elevated right ventricular size or pressure, and diuretic therapy; surgical repair of the
valve is indicated in severe cases.

PULMONIC VALVE DISEASE

Pulmonic Stenosis
Pulmonic stenosis (PS) is rare, and its cause is almost always congenital deformity of
the valve. Carcinoid syndrome, described in the previous section, is another rare etiol-
ogy, in which encasement and immobilization of the valve leafets can occur. The systolic
Valvular Heart Disease 211
crescendo—decrescendo murmur of PS is usually loudest at the second or third left intercostal
space close to the sternum. It may radiate to the neck or left shoulder and is often preceded
by an ejection click (see Chapter 2).

PS is considered to be severe if the peak systolic pressure gradient across the valve is
greater than 80 mm Hg, moderate if the gradient is 40 to 80 mm Hg, and mild if the gradient
is less than 40 mm Hg. Only patients with moderate-to-severe gradients are symptomatic. In
such cases, transcatheter balloon valvuloplasty is usually effective therapy.

Pulmonic Regurgitation
Pulmonic regurgitation (PR) most commonly develops in the setting of severe pulmonary
hypertension and results from dilatation of the valve ring by the enlarged pulmonary artery.
Auscultation reveals a high-pitched decrescendo murmur along the left sternal border that
is often indistinguishable from AR (the two conditions are easily differentiated by Doppler
echocardiography).

PROSTHETIC VALVES
The patient who undergoes valve replacement surgery often benefits dramatically from hemo-
dynamic and symptomatic improvement, but also acquires a new set of potential complica-
tions related to the valve prosthesis itself. Because all available valve substitutes have certain
limitations, valve replacement surgery is not a true “cure.”

Currently available valve substitutes include mechanical and bioprosthetic (derived
from animal or human tissue) devices (Fig. 8-11). One example of a mechanical valve is
the St. Jude prosthesis, a hinged bileafet valve consisting of two pyrolytic carbon discs
that open opposite one another. Mechanical valves, while durable, present foreign throm-
bogenic surfaces to the circulating blood and require lifelong anticoagulation to prevent
thromboembolism.

In contrast, bioprosthetic valves display a very low rate of thromboembolism and do not
require long-term anticoagulation therapy. The most commonly used bioprostheses are made from
glutaraldehyde-fixed porcine (pig) valves secured in a support frame. In addition, bovine (cow)
pericardium and human homograft (aortic valves harvested and cryopreserved from cadavers)

\ ~ ae >
, ‘4 " a 9 "eal A
A scans” B
HGURE8-11. Examples of prosthetic heart valves. A. St. Jude mechanical bileaf et valve in the open
position. (Gourtesy of St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN.) B A bioprosthetic aortic valve with leaf ets in the
closed position. (Gourtesy of Medtronic, Inc., Mnneapolis, MN.)
212 (chapter 8
prostheses are used. For patients who undergo AVR because of endocarditis, human homograft
replacements are especially useful because they have low rates of subsequent reinfection.

Bioprosthetic valves have limited durability compared with mechanical valves, and struc-
tural failure occurs in up to 50% by 15 years after implantation. The principal causes of failure
are leaf et tears and calcification. Failure rates vary greatly depending on the position of the
valve. For example, bioprosthetic valves in the mitral position deteriorate more rapidly than
those in the aortic position. This is likely because the mitral valve is exposed to higher closing
forces, resulting in greater leaf et stress than that experienced by aortic prostheses.

Common to all types of valve replacement is the risk of infective endocarditis (discussed
in the next section), which occurs with an incidence of 1% to 2% per patient per year. If
endocarditis occurs in the first 60 days after valve surgery, the mortality rate is exceedingly
high (50% to 80%). If endocarditis occurs later, mortality rates range from 20% to 50%.
Reoperation is usually required when endocarditis involves a mechanical prosthesis because
an adjacent abscess is frequently present. Some cases of bioprosthetic valve endocarditis may
respond to antibiotic therapy alone.

Given their respective advantages and disadvantages, the mortality and complication
rates of mechanical and bioprosthetic valves are similar for the first 10 years after replace-
ment. In 20-year follow-up studies of randomized, controlled trials, mechanical valves have
been shown to be superior to bioprosthetic valves for event-free survival, except for bleed-
ing complications related to anticoagulation therapy. Therefore, the decision about which
type of prosthesis to use in a patient often centers on (1) the patient’s expected lifespan in
comparison to the functional longevity of the valve, (2) risk-versus-benefit considerations
of chronic anticoagulation therapy, and (3) patient and surgeon preferences. Mechanical
valves are often recommended for younger patients and for those who will be tolerant
of, and compliant with, anticoagulant therapy. Bioprosthetic valves are generally suitable
choices for patients 65 years of age or older and for patients with contraindications to
chronic anticoagulation.

INFECITVE ENDOCARDITIS
Infection of the endocardial surface of the heart, including the cardiac valves, can lead to
extensive tissue damage and is often fatal. Infective endocarditis (IE) carries an overall
6-month mortality rate of 20% to 25%, even with appropriate therapy, and a 100% mortality
rate if it is not recognized and treated correctly.

There are three clinically useful ways to classify IE: (1) by clinical course, (2) by host
substrate, or (3) by the specific infecting microorganism. In the first classification scheme,
IE is termed acute bacterial endocarditis (ABE) when the syndrome presents as an acute,
fulminant infection, and a highly virulent and invasive organism such as Staphylococcus
aureus is causal. Because of the aggressiveness of the responsible microorganism, ABE may
occur on previously healthy heart valves. When JE presents with a more insidious clinical
course, it is termed subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) and less virulent organisms such
as viridans streptococci are typically involved. SBE most frequently occurs in individuals with
prior underlying valvular damage.

The second means of classification of IE is according to the host substrate: (1) native
valve endocarditis, (2) prosthetic valve endocarditis, or (3) endocarditis in the setting of
intravenous drug abuse. Of these, native valve endocarditis accounts for 60% to 80% of
patients. Different microorganisms and clinical courses are associated with each of these cat-
egories. For example, the skin contaminant Staphylococcus epidermidis is a common cause of
prosthetic valve endocarditis, but that is rarely the case when endocarditis occurs on a native
heart valve. Intravenous drug users have a propensity for S. aureus endocarditis of the right-
sided heart valves.
Valvular Heart Disease 213

The third classification of IE is according to the specific infecting microorganism
(e.g. S. aureus endocarditis). As described below, the most common responsible organisms
are gram-positive cocci. Certain bacterial strains that cause endocarditis are associated with
particular anatomic sources. For example, viridans group streptococci usually originate from
oropharyngeal tissue. Endocarditis due to Streptococcus bovis (more recently termed S. gal-
lolyticus) commonly arises from the gastrointestinal tract and should prompt investigation for
colonic polyps or adenocarcinoma.

Although the remainder of this discussion focuses on the endocarditis syndromes based on
clinical course, it is important to recognize that all three classifications of IE are used.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of endocarditis requires several conditions: (1) endocardial surface
injury, (2) platelet—fibrin-thrombus formation at the site of injury, (3) bacterial entry
into the circulation, and (4) bacterial adherence to the injured endocardial surface. The
first two conditions provide an environment favorable to infection, whereas the latter two
permit implantation of the organism on the endocardial surface. The most common cause
of endothelial injury is turbulent blood fow resulting from preexisting cardiac or intra-
vascular abnormalities, including acquired valvular heart lesions (e.g., mitral regurgita-
tion or aortic stenosis), congenital heart diseases, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see
Chapter 10). Endothelial injury may also be incited by foreign material within the circula-
tion, such as indwelling venous catheters, prosthetic heart valves, and other implanted
cardiac devices.

Once an endocardial surface is injured, platelets adhere to the exposed subendocardial con-
nective tissue and initiate the formation of a sterile thrombus (termed a vegetation) through
fibrin deposition. This process is referred to as nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE).
NBTE makes the endocardium more hospitable to microbes in two ways. First, the fibrin—
platelet deposits provide a surface for adherence by bacteria. Second, the fibrin covers adher-
ent organisms and protects them from host defenses by inhibiting chemotaxis and migration
of phagocytes.

When NBTE is present, the delivery of microorganisms in the bloodstream to the injured
surface can lead to IE. Three factors determine the ability of an organism to induce IE: (1)
access to the bloodstream, (2) survival of the organism in the circulation, and (3) adherence
of the bacteria to the endocardium. Bacteria can be introduced into the bloodstream when-
ever a mucosal or skin surface harboring an organism is traumatized, such as from the mouth
during dental procedures, or from the skin during illicit intravenous drug use. However, while
transient bacteremia is a relatively common event, only microorganisms suited for survival
in the circulation and able to adhere to the platelet—fibrin mesh overlying the endocardial
defect will cause IE. For example, gram-positive organisms account for the majority of cases
of endocarditis largely because of their resistance to destruction in the circulation by comple-
ment and their particular tendency to adhere to endothelial and platelet surface proteins.
The ability of certain streptococcal species to produce dextran, a bacterial cell wall compo-
nent that adheres to thrombus, correlates with their inciting endocarditis. Table 8-3 lists the
infectious agents reported to be the most common causes of endocarditis in modern tertiary
centers; staphylococci (especially S. aureus) and streptococci are the most frequent. Of note,
the proportion of patients with viridans group streptococci is higher in series of patients with
community-acquired endocarditis.

Once organisms adhere to the injured surface, they may be protected from phagocytic
activity by the overlying fibrin. The organisms are then free to multiply, which enlarges the
infected vegetation. The latter provides a source for continuous bacteremia and can lead
to several complications, including (1) mechanical cardiac injury, (2) thrombotic or septic
214 (Chapter 8
Organism Incidence (%)
Staphylococci
S. aureus 31.6
@agulase negative 10.5
Streptococci
Viridans 18.0
Enterococci 10.6
S. bovis 6.5
Other streptococci 5.1
Other organisms (e.g., gram-negative 8.7
bacteria, fungi)
Culture negative or polymicrobial ~9.4
a
Derived from Fowler VG Jr, Mro JM Hoen B, et al. Staphylococcus aureus endocardi-
tis: a consequence of medical progress. JAMA 2005;293:3012-3021.
emboli, and (3) immune injury mediated by antigen—antibody deposition. For example,
local extension of the infection within the heart can result in progressive valvular damage,
abscess formation, or erosion into the cardiac conduction system. Portions of a vegetation
may embolize, often to the central nervous system, kidneys, or spleen, and incite infec-
tion or infarction of the target organs. Each of these is a potentially fatal complication.
Additionally, immune complex deposition can result in glomerulonephritis, arthritis, or
vasculitis.

The epidemiology of IE has evolved in recent decades as bacteria resistant to antibiot-
ics have become ubiquitous in the hospital setting and have spread into the community.
Antibiotic resistant strains such as methicillin-resistant S. aureus and vancomycin-resistant
enterococci have become more common and are associated with increased mortality rates
from IE.

Cinical Manifestations

A patient with acute IE is likely to report an explosive and rapidly progressive illness with
high fever and shaking chills. In contrast, subacute IE presents less dramatically with low-
grade fever often accompanied by nonspecific constitutional symptoms such as fatigue,
anorexia, weakness, myalgia, and night sweats. These symptoms are not specific for IE and
could easily be mistaken for infuenza or an upper respiratory tract infection. Thus, the
diagnosis of subacute IE requires a high index of suspicion. A history of a valve lesion or
other condition known to predispose to endocarditis is helpful. A thorough history should
also inquire about injection drug use, recent dental procedures, or other potential sources
of bacteremia.

Cardiac examination may reveal a murmur representing underlying valvular pathology that
predisposed the patient to IE, or a new murmur of valvular insufficiency owing to IE-induced
damage. The development of right-sided valve lesions (e.g., tricuspid regurgitation), although
rare in normal hosts, is particularly common in endocarditis associated with intravenous drug
abuse. Serial examination in ABE may be especially useful because changes in a murmur
(i.e., worsening regurgitation) over time may correspond with rapidly progressive valvular
Valvular Heart Disease 215
destruction. During the course of endocarditis, severe valvular destruction may result in signs
of heart failure, which is the leading cause of death in patients with IE.

Other physical findings that may appear in JE are those associated with septic embolism or
immune complex deposition. Central nervous system emboli occur in up to 40% of patients,
often resulting in new neurologic findings on physical examination. Injury to the kidneys, of
embolic or immunologic origin, may manifest as f ank pain, hematuria, or renal failure. Lung
infarction (septic pulmonary embolism) or infection (pneumonia) is particularly common in
endocarditis that involves right-sided valves.

Embolic infarction and seeding of the vasa vasorum of arteries can cause localized aneu-
rysm formation (termed a mycotic aneurysm) that weakens the vessel wall and may rupture.
Mycotic aneurysms may be found in the aorta, viscera, or peripheral organs, and are par-
ticularly dangerous in cerebral vessels, because rupture there can result in fatal intracranial
hemorrhage.

Skin findings resulting from septic embolism or immune complex vasculitis are often col-
lectively referred to as peripheral stigmata of endocarditis. For example, petechiae may appear
as tiny, circular, red-brown discolorations on mucosal surfaces or skin. Splinter hemorrhages,
the result of subungual microemboli, are small, longitudinal hemorrhages found beneath
nails. Other peripheral stigmata of IE, which are now rarely encountered, include painless,
f at, irregular discolorations found on the palms and soles called Janeway lesions; tender, pea-
sized, erythematous nodules found primarily in the pulp space of the fingers and toes termed
Osler nodes; and emboli to the retina that produce Roth spots, microinfarctions that appear as
white dots surrounded by hemorrhage.

The systemic inf ammatory response produced by the infection is responsible for fever and
splenomegaly, as well as for a number of laboratory findings, including an elevated white
blood cell count with a leftward shift (increase in proportion of neutrophils and immature
granulocytes), an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level, and in
approximately 50% of cases, an elevated serum rheumatoid factor.

The electrocardiogram may help identify extension of the infection into the cardiac conduc-
tion system, manifest by various degrees of heart block or new arrhythmias. Echocardiography
is used to visualize vegetations, valvular dysfunction, and associated abscess formation.
Echocardiographic assessment can consist of transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) or trans-
esophageal echocardiography (TEE), as described in Chapter 3. TTE is useful in detecting
large vegetations and has the advantage of being noninvasive and easy to obtain. However,
while the specif city of TTE for vegetations is high, the sensitivity for finding vegetations is
less than 60%. TEE, on the other hand, is much more sensitive (> 90%) for the detection of
vegetations and myocardial abscess formation and can be particularly useful for the evalua-
tion of infection involving prosthetic valves.

Central to the diagnosis and appropriate treatment of endocarditis is the identification of
the responsible microorganism by blood culture. Once positive culture results are obtained,
treatment can be tailored to the causative organism according to its antibiotic sensitivities. A
specific etiologic agent is identified approximately 90% of the time. However, blood cultures
may return negative if antibiotics have already been administered or if the organism has
unusual growth requirements.

Even after a careful history, examination, and evaluation of laboratory data, the diag-
nosis of IE can be elusive. Therefore, attempts have been made to standardize the diag-
nosis, resulting in the now widely used Duke criteria (Table 8-4). By this standard, the
diagnosis of endocarditis rests on the presence of either two major criteria, one major
and three minor criteria, or five minor criteria. Positive blood cultures and endocardial
involvement detected by echocardiography provide the strongest evidence for IE and are
considered major criteria. Minor criteria relate to clinical risk factors and findings on
physical examination.
216 (Chapter 8
Mbjor Citeria Minor Giteria
I. Positive blood culture, defned as either Aor B _— Predisposing cardiac condition or intravenous
A. Typical microorganism for IE from two drug use
separate blood cultures Fever (= 38.0°O
1. Streptococci viridans, S. bovis, HACEK Vascular phenomena (septic arterial or pulmonary
group; or emboli, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemor-
2. Staphylococcus aureus or enterococci, in rhage, conjunctival hemorrhage, Janeway
the absence of a primary focus lesions)
B. Mcroorganisms consistent with IE from Immunologic phenomena (glomerulonephritis,
persistently positive blood cultures Osler nodes, Roth spots, rheumatoid factor)
1. Blood cultures drawn >12 hr apart, or Positive blood cultures not meeting major
2. All of three, or most of four separate cul- criteria or serologic evidence of infection with
tures drawn at least 1 hr apart organism consistent with IE
3. Single positive blood culture for @xiella
bumetii or antiphase I IgGantibody titer
> 1:800
il. Evidence of endocardial involvement, def ned
as Aor B
A. Echocardiogram positive for endocarditis:
|. Oscillating intracardiac mass, or
2. Myocardial abscess, or
3. New partial detachment of prosthetic
valve
B. New valvular regurgitation
a
Clinical diagnosis of def nite endocarditis requires two major criteria, one major plus three minor criteria, or f ve
minor criteria. Possible endocarditis requires one major plus one minor criteria or three minor criteria.
HACEK, Haemophilus spp., Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Gardiobacterium hominis, Hkenella spp., and
Kingella kingae.
Derived from Li JS, Sexton DJ, Mck N, et al. Proposed modif cations to the Duke criteria for the diagnosis of
infective endocarditis. Cin Infect Dis. 2000;30:633-638.
Treatment
Treatment of endocarditis entails 4 to 6 weeks of high-dose intravenous antibiotic therapy.
Although empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics may be used initially (after blood cultures are
obtained) for patients who are severely ill or hemodynamically unstable, specifc, directed
therapy is appropriate once the causative microorganism has been identif ed. Surgical inter-
vention, usually with valve replacement, is indicated for patients with persistent bacteremia
or fever despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, for those with severe valvular dysfunction
leading to heart failure, and for individuals who develop myocardial abscesses or recurrent
endocarditis-related thromboemboli.
Prevention
An additional essential concept is prevention of endocarditis by administering antibiotics to
certain susceptible individuals before invasive procedures that are likely to result in bactere-
mia. The American Heart Association recommends such antibiotic prophylaxis for the cardiac
conditions that place them at the highest risk for developing an adverse outcome from IE, as
delineated in Table 8-5, when such individuals are subjected to procedures listed in the table.
Valvular Heart Disease 217
Cardiac conditions for which antibiotic prophylaxis is reasonable’
1. Presence of a prosthetic heart valve or prior valve repair with prosthetic material
2. Prior history of endocarditis
3. G@rtain congenital heart diseases (CHD):
* Unrepaired cyanotic CHD (described in Chapter 16)
* @mpletely repaired congenital heart defects with prosthetic material, during the frst 6 months
after the procedure (1.e., prior to protective endothelialization)
* Repaired GHD with residual defects adjacent to the site of prosthetic material (which inhibits
endothelialization)
4. Cardiac transplant recipients who develop cardiac valve abnormalities
Procedures that warrant antibiotic therapy for conditions listed above
1. Dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue, manipulation of periapical region
of the teeth, or perforation of the oral mucosa
2. Upper respiratory tract procedures, only if involves incision or biopsy of mucosa
(e.g., tonsillectomy, bronchoscopy with biopsy)
3. Genitourinary or gastrointestinal procedures, only if infections of those systems are present
4. Procedures on infected skin or musculoskeletal tissue

a

*The conditions on this list have the highest risk of adverse outcomes from endocarditis.

Derived from Wilson W Taubert KA, Gewitz M et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from the

American Heart Association: a guideline from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and

Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Gouncil on Cinical Cardiology,

Quncil on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Gare and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary

Working Group. Greulation. 2007;116:1736—1754.

SUMMARY

° Unifying principles do not govern the behavior of all valvular heart diseases—effective
management requires identification of the valve abnormality, a determination of its sever-
ity, and an understanding of the pathophysiologic consequences and natural history of
the condition (Table 8-6).

e Diagnosis of valvular disease is assisted by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which
allows for staging of disease severity; in selected patients, additional investigation with
exercise testing or cardiac catheterization may be necessary to define the significance of
the condition.

° Management of patients with stenotic or regurgitant valves involves serial clinical and
echocardiographic assessments; pharmacologic therapy is sometimes prescribed for
symptomatic improvement, but recognition of timely indications for valve repair or
replacement is essential.

e Mitral stenosis usually results from prior rheumatic fever; left atrial (LA) enlargement and
atrial fibrillation are common.

° Mitral regurgitation (MR) results from disruption of the structural integrity of any of the
components of the mitral valve apparatus or their coordinated action; with chronic MR,

LA enlargement, and left ventricular (LV) volume overload are typical.

e In mitral valve prolapse, the valve leaf ets are elongated, and the normal dense collagen and
elastin matrix of the valvular fibrosa is fragmented and replaced with loose myxomatous
connective tissue; one or both leaf ets bow into the LA during systole resulting in lack of
coaptation and mitral regurgitation.

e Aortic stenosis has three primary causes: (1) degenerative calcification of a previously
normal trileaf et aortic valve, (2) calcification of a congenitally bicuspid aortic valve, and
(3) rheumatic valve disease; the primary hemodynamic consequence is LV pressure overload
with compensatory LV hypertrophy; cardinal symptoms are chest discomfort, exertional
dyspnea, and exertional light-headedness.
218 Chapter 8
Dh
— | — —
—_—_—_— —_—_—_—_—_— — EE
a PCC
Dh
es
qa
Dh
qw
qe
rr aw
uw
qe
qe
qe
qe
qe
Qu
uw
on, a
qe
we
Qe
we
we
Valvular Heart Disease 219

° Aortic regurgitation may result either from abnormalities of the aortic valve leaf ets or from
dilatation of the aortic root; the primary hemodynamic perturbation is LV volume overload.

° Tricuspid stenosis is rare and is usually a long-term consequence of rheumatic fever.

° Tricuspid regurgitation is usually functional (due to RV enlargement) rather than structural
in nature.

° Pulmonic stenosis is rare, and its cause is almost always congenital deformity of the valve.

e Pulmonic regurgitation most commonly develops in the setting of severe pulmonary hyper-
tension and results from dilatation of the valve ring by an enlarged pulmonary artery.

° The pathogenesis of endocarditis requires endocardial surface injury, platelet—fibrin—
thrombus formation at the site of injury, bacterial entry into the circulation, and bacterial
adherence to the injured endocardial surface.

Acknowledgments

Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Christopher A. Miller, MD; Mia M.

Edwards, MD; Patrick Yachimski, MD; Stephen K. Frankel, MD; Edward Chan, MD; Elia Duh, MD;

Brian Stidham, MD; and John A. Bittl, MD.

Additional Reading

Gerber MA, Baltimore RS, Eaton CB, et al. Prevention Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill;
of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment 2012:1929-1950.
of acute streptococcal pharyngitis. Circulation. Vahanian A, Alfieri O, Andreotti F, et al. Guidelines on the
2009;119:1541—-1551. management of valvular heart disease (version 2012); The

Habib G, Hoen B, Tomos P, et al. Guidelines on the preven- Joint Task Force on the Management of Valvular Heart
tion, diagnosis, and treatment of infective endocarditis Disease of the European Society of Cardiology and the
(new version 2009); The Task Force on the Prevention, European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. Eur
Diagnosis, and Treatment of Infective Endocarditis of the Heart J. 2012;33:2451-2496.
European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2009;30: Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of
2369-2413. infective endocarditis: guidelines from the American

Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2014 AHA/ ACC Heart Association: a guideline from the American Heart
guideline for the management of patients with valvu- Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki
lar heart disease: a report of the American College of Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in
Cardiology/ American Heart Association Task Force on the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:e57-e185. on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality

O’Gara P, Loscalzo J. Valvular heart disease. In: Longo DL, of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working
Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al., eds. Harrison’s Principles of Group. Circulation. 2007;116:1736—1754.
”
1 F 4 } =z
1 i
Heart Failure é
'
David Miranda \ i,
Gregory D. Lewis
Michael A. Fifer
-
=
Chapter Outline T he heart normally accepts blood at low flling pressures
during diastole and then propels it forward at higher
Physiology . . .
pressures in systole. Heart failure is present when the heart

Determinants of Contractile . :

Function in the Intact Heart is unable to pump blood forward at a suff cient rate to meet

Pressure—Volume Loops the metabolic demands of the body or is able to do so only

Pathophysiology if cardiac flling pressures are abnormally high. Although

Heart Failure with Reduced EF conditions outside the heart may cause this def nition to be

Heart Farture with Preserved EF met through inadequate tissue perfusion (e.g., severe hemor-

Right-Sided Heart Failure . . .

. rhage) or increased metabolic demands (e.g., hyperthyroid-
@mpensatory Mechanisms . . . . .

Frnalevesiingsvsohenions ism), in this chapter, only cardiac causes of heart failure are

Neurohormonal Alterations considered.

Ventricular Hypertrophy and Heart failure results in a clinical syndrome of fatigue, short-

Remodeling ness of breath, and often volume overload. It may be the fnal
ee _ SHE sca se. TOTTI coronary EIS CET
Cinical Manifestations infarction, valvular diseases, hypertension, congenital heart

Symptoms disease, and the cardiomyopathies. More than 550,000 new

Physical Signs cases are diagnosed each year in the United States, where the

Diagnostic Studies current prevalence is approximately 5.8 million. The number

Prognosis of patients with heart failure is increasing, not only because
Treatment Of Heart Failure With — : : ;
: : the population is aging but also because of interventions

Reduced Kection Fraction . . _.

Diuretics that prolong survival after damaging cardiac insults such as
myocardial infarction. As a result, heart failure now accounts
for more than 12 million medical offce visits annually and

220
