y ie
Cngenital Heart Disease iv,
hee
. a 0
Zena L. Knight I t [
David W. Brown | ™
Chapter Outline Cree heart diseases are the most common form of
—————— birth defects and are the leading cause of death from birth
Normal Develop ment of the abnormalities in the first year of life. These conditions affect
Cardiovascular System : : : : _
Development of the Heart Tube approximately 8 of 1,000 live births, and an estimated 1 million
Formation of the Heart Loop people in the United States have congenital heart lesions.
Septation Some abnormalities are severe and require immediate medical
Development of the Cardiac attention, whereas many are less pronounced and have mini-
Valves mal clinical consequences. Although congenital heart defects
Fetal and dansifional are present at birth, milder defects may remain inapparent for
CGreulations ; ;
Fetal-Greulation weeks, months, or years and may even escape detection until
Transitional Grculation adulthood.
@mmon Ongenital Heart The past half-century has witnessed tremendous advances
Lesions in the understanding of the pathophysiology of congenital
Hsenmenger Syndrome / . . .
genetic mutations, environmental factors, maternal illness,
or ingestion of toxins during pregnancy can contribute to
cardiac malformations. However, specific etiologies remain
unknown in most cases.

The survival of children with congenital heart disease has
also improved dramatically in recent decades, largely because
of better diagnostic and interventional techniques. However,
the lifelong needs of affected patients include guidance

a regarding physical activity, pregnancy, and employment.
374 Chapter 16
neonate to adjust to life outside the womb. Gven the remarkable complexity of these processes, it is easy
to envision ways that cardiovascular malfunctions could develop.
This chapter begins with an overview of fetal cardiovascular development and then describes the most
common forms of congenital heart disease.
NORMAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
By the 3rd week of gestation, the nutrient
and gas exchange needs of the rapidly grow-
ing embryo can no longer be met by dif-
fusion alone, and the tissues begin to rely
on the developing cardiovascular system to porsal aorta &D &>
deliver these substances over long distances. S
Development of the Heart Tube Qa f QC
In the middle of the 3rd week of embryo- IN Endocardial heart tube
genesis, mesodermal cells proliferate at the
They eventually form two longitudinal cell
clusters known as angioblastic cords. These
cords canalize and become paired endothe-
lial heart tubes (Fig. 16-1). Lateral embry- @& oe &
onic folding gradually causes these two  Foregut
tubes to oppose one another and allows
them to fuse in the ventral midline, forming aw
a single endocardial tube by day 22. From a6
inside to outside, the layers of this primi- SIS,
tive heart tube are an endothelial lining
that becomes the endocardium, a layer of
gelatinous connective tissue (cardiac jelly), Bp Fusing endocardial heart tubes
and a thick muscular layer that is derived
from the splanchnic mesoderm and devel-
ops into the myocardium. The endocardial
tube is continuous with the aortic arch sys-
tem rostrally and with the venous system
caudally. The primitive heart begins to beat
around day 22 or 23, causing blood to circu- @ o @>
late by the beginning of the 4th week. The
space overlying the developing cardiac area °°8 —
housing the future heart. Pericardial (o—~
cavity : & :
Formation of the Heart Loop a
As the tubular heart grows and elongates,
it develops a series of alternate constric- Cc Endocardial heart tube
creating the frst sign HGURE 16-1. Embryonic transverse sections
of the primitive heart chambers—the illustrating fusion of the two heart tubes into a
truncus arteriosus, the bulbus cordis, the single endocardial heart tube. A. 18 days. B 21 days.
primitive ventricle, the primitive atrium, CC 22 days.
Congenital Heart Disease 375
To aortic arches
Truncus arteriosus [Aorta, pulmonary artery]
Bulbus cordis [Outlet of ventricles ]
Primitive ventricle [Inlet of ventricles |
Atrioventricular
canal >
Primitive atrium [Right and left atria]
Sinus venosus [Part of right atrium]
HGURE 16-2. The straight heart tube at approximately 22 days. The structures that will ultimately form
from each segment are listed in brackets.
and the sinus venosus (Fig. 16-2). Continued growth and elongation within the confined
U-shaped loop with the round end pointing ventrally and to the right by day 28. The result
of this looping is placement of the atrium and sinus venosus above and behind the truncus
arteriosus, bulbus cordis, and ventricle (Fig. 16-3). At this point, neither definitive septa
between the developing chambers nor definitive valvular tissue have formed. The connec-
tion between the primitive atrium and ventricle is termed the atrioventricular (AV) canal.
In time, the AV canal becomes two separate canals, one housing the tricuspid valve and the
other the mitral valve. The sinus venosus is eventually incorporated into the right atrium,
forming both the coronary sinus and a portion of the right atrial wall. The bulbus cordis
and truncus arteriosus contribute to the future ventricular outf ow tracts, forming parts of
the proximal aorta and pulmonary artery.
Septation
Septation of the developing atrium, AV canal, and ventricle occurs between the 4th and
6th weeks. Although these events are described separately here, they actually occur
simultaneously.
1 Truncus
runcus :
; arteriosus
arteriosus ae
Bulbus Primitive Primitive
( cordis right le ft
=> ( =—_> atrium atrium
Primitive Bulboventricular Primitive Conus cordis
atrium . soe
sulcus right Primitive
ventricle le ft
ventricle
A B Cc
HIGURE 16-3. Formation of the heart loop. A,B By day 23, continued growth and elongation within the
conf ned pericardial space necessitate bending of the heart tube on itself, forming a U-shaped loop that points
ventrally and to the right. C Looping eventually places the atria above and behind the primitive ventricles.
376 Chapter 16
Septation of the Atria
The primary atrial septum, also known as the septum primum, begins as a ridge of tissue
on the roof of the common atrium that grows downward into the atrial cavity (Fig. 16-4).
As the septum primum advances, it leaves a large opening known as the ostium primum
between the crescent-shaped leading edge of the septum and the endocardial cushions sur-
rounding the AV canal. The ostium primum allows passage of blood between the forming
atria. Eventually, the septum primum fuses with the superior aspect of the endocardial
cushions (described in more detail in the next section), obliterating the ostium primum.
However, before closure of the ostium primum is complete, small perforations appear in
the center of the septum primum that ultimately coalesce to form the ostium secundum,
preserving a pathway for blood f ow between the atria (see Fig. 16-4). Following closure of
the ostium primum, a second, more muscular membrane, the septum secundum, begins to
develop immediately to the right of the superior aspect of the septum primum. This septum
grows downward and overlaps the ostium secundum. The septum secundum eventually
fuses with the endocardial cushions, although only in a partial fashion, leaving an oval-
shaped opening known as the foramen ovale. The superior edge of the septum primum
then gradually regresses, leaving the lower edge to act as a “f ap-like” valve that allows only
right-to-left f ow through the foramen ovale (Fig. 16-5). During gestation, blood passes from
the right atrium to the left atrium because the pressure in the fetal right atrium is greater
than that in the left atrium. This pressure gradient changes direction postnatally, causing
the valve to close, as described later.
Septation of the Atrioventricular Canal
Growth of the endocardial cushions contributes to atrial septation and, as described later,
to the membranous portion of the interventricular septum. Endocardial cushions initially
Septum
secundum Ostium
secundum
Ostium Septum
primum primum
EGS
cushion oramen
A B
Septum Ostium
secundum secundum
Septum x Foramen S
secundum eptum
ovale primum
Interventricular Septum _Membranous
foramen primum interventricular
Muscular septum
interventricular
septum
Cc D
HGURE16-4. Atrial septal formation at 30 days (A), 33 days (B), and 37 days (© of development as well
as in the newbom (D). As the septum primum grows toward the ventricles, the opening between it and the AV
canal is the ostium primum. Before the ostium primum completely closes, perforations within the upper portion of
the septum primum form the ostium secundum. A second ridge of tissue, the septum secundum, grows downward
to the right of the septum primum, partially covering the ostium secundum. The foramen ovale is an opening of
the septum secundum that is covered by the “f ap valve” of the lower septum primum. (Mbdified from Mbss AJ,
Adams FH. Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents. Baltimore, MD: Wiliams & Wilkins; 1968:16.)
Congenital Heart Disease 377
begin as swellings of the gelatinous connective iano ATRIUM Tener ATRIUM
tissue layer within the AV canal. They are then (higher pressure) (lower pressure)
populated by migrating cells from the primitive | Septum secundum ——+
endocardium and subsequently transform into ov)
mesenchymal tissue. Tissue growth occurs Shunt
primarily in the horizontal plane, resulting in _ Septum primum
septation of the AV canal through the contin- Foramen ovale
ued growth of the lateral, superior, and inferior
endocardial cushions (Fig. 16-6). Septation a
creates the right and left canals that later

Septation of the Ventricles and Ventricular
Qutf ow Tracts Septum secundum —-—>
Lae RIGHT ATRIUM «__ LEFT ATRIUM
At the end of the 4th week, the primitive ven- (lower pressure) (higher pressure)
tricle begins to grow, leaving a median muscu-
lar ridge, the primitive interventricular septum.
Most of the early increase in height of the sep- +— Septum primum
tum results from dilation of the two new ven-
does new cell growth in the septum itself con- FIGURE 16-5. Diagrammatic depiction of the
tribute to its size. The free edge of the muscular f ap-type valve of the foramen ovale. A. Before
interventricular septum does not fuse with the birth, the valve permits only right-to-left fow of
. . . . blood from the higher-pressured right atrium (RA)
endocardial cushions; the opening that remains ;
a ; to the lower-pressured left atrium (LA).
and allows communication between the right p Following birth, the pressure in the LA becomes.
ventricle (RV) and left ventricle (LV) is the greater than that in the RA, causing the septum
interventricular foramen (Fig. 16-7). This primum to close firmly against the septum
remains open until the end of the 7th week of secundum. (Derived from Mbore KL, Persaud TVN,
gestation, when the fusion of tissue from the The Developing Human. Philadelphia, PA: WB
right and left bulbar ridges and the endocardial Saunders; 1993:318.)
cushions forms the membranous portion of the
interventricular septum.
Superior Left
endocardial atrioventricular
cushion canal
Lateral Lateral
=» endocardial endocardial =» =»
cushion cushion
, Common Inferior Right
atrioventricular endocardial atrioventricular
canal cushion canal
HGURE 16-6. The progression of septal formation in the atrioventricular canal through successive
stages. The septum forms through growth of the superior, inferior, and lateral endocardial cushions. The
endocardial cushions are masses of mesenchymal tissue that surround the atrioventricular canal and aid in the
formation of the orifices of the mitral and tricuspid valves, as well as the upper interventricular septum and
lower interatrial septum.
378 Chapter 16
During the Sth week, neural crest—derived
mesenchymal proliferation occurring in the bulbus
cordis and truncus arteriosus creates a pair of protru-
sions known as the bulbar ridges (Fig. 16-8). These
ridges fuse in the midline and undergo a 180-degree
spiraling process, forming the aorticopulmonary
septum. This septum divides the bulbus cordis and Interventricular
the truncus arteriosus into two arterial channels, the foramen
pulmonary artery and the aorta, the former continu- Muscular
ous with the RV and the latter with the LV. interventricular
septum
Development of the Cardiac Valves
HIGURE 16-7. ‘The interventricular septum
Semilunar Valve Development (Aortic and and the interventricular foramen. (Derived
Pulmonary Valve S) from Moore KL, Persaud TVN. The Developing
; ; Human. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders;
The semilunar valves start to develop just before the 1993:325.)
completion of the aorticopulmonary septum. The
process begins when three outgrowths of subendocardial mesenchymal tissue form around
both the aortic and pulmonary orifices. These growths are ultimately shaped and excavated
by the joint action of programmed cell death and blood f ow to create the three thin-walled
cusps of both the aortic and pulmonary valves.
a
Aorta [ Pulmonary
f => artery
' q
Left bulbar
| 5 -~ ridge
Right bulbar ff | Interventricular
ridge > foramen Right atrio- Interventricular
| y) Muscular ventricular foramen
L ¢ part of canal Le ft atrio-
ou sy interventricular ventricular
— septum canal
Fused endocardial
A cushions B Endocardial cushions
Pulmonary HGURE16-8. Formation of the aorticopulmonary
artery septum occurs via fusion of the bulbar ridges,
. resulting in division of the bulbus cordis and
Aorticopulmonary . .
septum truncus arteriosus into the aorta and pulmonary
Right artery (A, 5 weeks; B, 6 weeks; C 7 weeks). The
ventricle bulbus cordis becomes the right ventricular outf ow
tract. Fusion of tissue from the endocardial cushions,
Membranous Muscular the aorticopulmonary septum, and the muscular
par oF tricular partof I interventricular septum creates the membranous
septum septum ar interventricular septum. (Derived from Moore KL, Persaud
TVN. The Developing Human. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Cc Saunders; 1993:322.)
Congenital Heart Disease 379
Atrioventricular Valve Development (Mitral —"S
and Tricuspid Valves) \
After the endocardial cushions fuse to \
form the septa between the right and left
AV canals, the surrounding subendocardial / \
mesenchymal tissue proliferates and devel- f iierventricular
; Oramen
ops outgrowths similar to those of the semi- |
lunar valves. These are also sculpted by | yp vumen of lef
ventricle
programmed cell death that occurs within
the inferior surface of the nascent leaf ets . -Z
and in the ventricular wall. This process A
leaves behind only a few fine muscular
strands to connect the valves to the ventric-
ular wall (Fig. 16-9). The superior portions
of these strands eventually degenerate and
are replaced by strings of dense connective
tissue, becoming the chordae tendineae.
(i Y Deve loping mitral
FETAL AND TRANSITIONAL | ,~
CRCOULATIONS ' | Membranous part
of interventricular
The fetal circulation elegantly serves the Ny septum
needs of in utero development. At birth, the NN
. . . spe Trabeculae
circulation automatically undergoes modifi- Bg carneae
cations that establish the normal blood f ow
pattern of a newborn infant.
Fetal Grceulation \ _- Atrioventricular node
In fetal life, oxygenated blood leaves the pla- ‘ral val
centa through the umbilical vein (Fig. 16-10). yy Niven
Approximately half of this blood is shunted \
ing the hepatic vasculature and proceeding |
directly into the inferior vena cava (IVC).
The remaining blood passes through the a muscle
portal vein to the liver and then into the IVC Ventricular conduction
through the hepatic veins. IVC blood is there- Cc system
fore a mixture of well-oxygenated umbilical HIGURE16-9. Proliferation of mesenchymal tissue
venous blood and the blood of low oxygen surrounding the atrioventricular canals forms the
tension returning from the systemic veins of atrioventricular valves. A-C Progression of the
the fetus. Because of this mixture, the oxygen process, including degeneration of myocardium and
: ; ; ~ replacement by connective tissue that forms the
tension of inferior vena caval blood is higher chordae tendineae; their muscular attachments to the
than that of blood returning to the fetal ventricular wall are the papillary muscles. (Derived
right atrium from the superior vena cava. from Moore KL, Persaud TVN. The Developing Human.
This distinction is important because these Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1993:325.)
two streams of blood are partially separated
within the right atrium to follow different circulatory paths. The consequence of this separation
is that the fetal brain and myocardium receive blood of relatively higher oxygen content, whereas
the more poorly oxygenated blood is diverted to the placenta (via the descending aorta and
umbilical arteries) for subsequent oxygenation.
380 chapter 16
A X { {
Ve
Superior vema cava / aa aorta
wi’ a._Y¥ \ teri
=i # CS SS Ductus arteriosus
el a
= a ae qe ‘ , .
Right ~ ae | (aa ss
\
) ane |) =
~~ a ~
Y y J
Inferior vena cava a
. . / Left hepatic vein
Right hepatic
vein |
| j Ductus venosus
|
Ni» Z Descending aorta
|
| s
yous _
| costal te
Portal vein y
= r~
Umbilical vein La ~
{ - ‘a
Umbilicus ea | . | Oxygen saturation
rS<S Urinary of blood:
YN bladder -~
P / \ | nigh
{ Umbilical \ | / 4) L] Medium
Y arteries | aX
| WY
i 4 _—4 | j < \e
j = lacent Legs Internal iliac
artery
HGURE16-10. The fetal circulation. Arrows indicate the direction of blood f ow. Three shunts (ductus
venosus, foramen ovale, and ductus arteriosus) allow most of the blood to bypass the liver and lungs during
fetal life but cease to function shortly after birth. (Modified from Mbore KL, Persaud TVN. The Developing
Human. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1993:344.)

Most IVC blood entering the right atrium is directed to the left atrium through the fora
‘men ovale. This intracardiac shunt of relatively well-oxygenated blood is facilitated by the
inferior border of the septum secundum, termed the crista dividens, which is positioned
such that it overrides the opening of the IVC into the right atrium. This shunted blood
then mixes with the small amount of poorly oxygenated blood returning to the left atrium
through the fetal pulmonary veins (remember that the lungs are not ventilated in utero;
the developing pulmonary tissues actually remove oxygen from the blood). From the left
atrium, blood f ows into the LV and is then pumped into the ascending aorta. This well-
Congenital Heart Disease 381
the coronary arteries and perfuses the myocardium, (2) 62% travels in the carotid and sub-
clavian vessels to the upper body and brain, and (3) 29% passes into the descending aorta
to the rest of the fetal body.

The remaining well-oxygenated inferior vena caval blood entering the right atrium mixes
with poorly oxygenated blood from the superior vena cava and passes to the RV. In the fetus,
the RV is the actual “workhorse” of the heart, providing two thirds of the total cardiac out-
put. This output fows into the pulmonary artery and from there either into the lungs (12%
of RV output), or through the ductus arteriosus into the descending aorta (88% of RV out-
put), where it mixes with the better oxygenated blood from the LV described in the previous
paragraph. This unequal distribution of right ventricular outf ow is actually quite efficient.
Bypassing the lungs is desired because the fetal lungs are filled with amniotic fuid and are
incapable of gas exchange. The low oxygen tension of this fuid causes constriction of the
pulmonary vessels, which increases pulmonary vascular resistance and facilitates shunting of
blood through the ductus arteriosus to the systemic circulation. From the descending aorta,
blood is distributed to the lower body and to the umbilical arteries, leading back to the pla-
centa for gas exchange.

Transitional Greulation
Immediately following birth, the neonate rapidly adjusts to life outside the womb. The newly
functioning lungs replace the placenta as the organ of gas exchange, and the three shunts
(ductus venosus, foramen ovale, and ductus arteriosus) that operated during gestation ulti-
mately close. This shift in the site of gas exchange and the resulting changes in cardiovascular
architecture allow the newborn to survive independently.

As the umbilical cord is clamped or constricts naturally, the low-resistance placental f ow
is removed from the arterial system, resulting in an increase in systemic vascular resistance.
Simultaneously, pulmonary vascular resistance falls for two reasons: (1) the mechanical inf a-
tion of the lungs after birth stretches the lung tissues, causing pulmonary artery expansion
and wall thinning, and (2) vasodilatation of the pulmonary vasculature occurs in response
to the rise in blood oxygen tension accompanying aeration of the lungs. This reduction in
pulmonary resistance results in a dramatic rise in pulmonary blood fow. It is most marked
within the first day after birth but continues for the next several weeks until adult levels of
pulmonary resistance are achieved.

As pulmonary resistance falls and more blood travels to the lungs through the pulmonary
artery, venous return from the pulmonary veins to the left atrium also increases, causing left
atrial pressure to rise. At the same time, cessation of umbilical venous f ow and constriction
of the ductus venosus cause a fall in IVC and right atrial pressures. As a result, the left atrial
pressure becomes greater than that in the right atrium, and the valve of the foramen ovale
is forced against the septum secundum, eliminating the previous f ow between the atria (see
Fig. 16-5). Failure of the valve to permanently fuse to the septum secundum results in a patent
foramen ovale (PFO), as described later in this chapter.

With oxygenation now occurring in the newborn lungs, the ductus arteriosus becomes
superf uous and closes. During fetal life, a high circulating level of prostaglandin E, (PGE,)
is generated in response to relative hypoxia, which causes the smooth muscle of the ductus
arteriosus to relax, keeping it patent. After birth, PGE, levels decline as the oxygen tension
rises and the ductus therefore constricts. In a healthy full-term infant, this occurs during the
first hours to days after delivery. The responsiveness of the ductus to vasoactive substances
depends on the gestational age of the fetus, and it often fails to constrict in premature infants.
This results in the congenital anomaly known as patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) (described
below).

With the anatomic separation of the circulatory paths of the right and left sides of the heart
now complete, the stroke volume of the LV increases and that of the RV decreases, equalizing
382 chapter 16
‘the cardiac output from both ventricles. The augmented pressure and volume load placed on
the LV induces the myocardial cells of that chamber to hypertrophy, while the decreased pres-
sure and volume loads on the RV result in gradual regression of RV wall thickness.
COMMON CONGENITAL HEART LESIONS
Congenital heart defects are generally well tolerated before birth. The fetus benefits from
shunting of blood through the ductus arteriosus and the foramen ovale, allowing the bypass
of most defects. It is only after birth, when the neonate has been separated from the maternal
circulation and the oxygenation it provides, and the fetal shunts have closed, that congenital
heart defects usually become manifest.

Congenital heart lesions can be categorized as cyanotic or acyanotic. Cyanosis refers to a
blue-purple discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes caused by an elevated blood
concentration of deoxygenated hemoglobin (usually >4 g/dL, which corresponds to an
arterial O, saturation of approximately 80% to 85% in a neonate with a normal total hemo-
globin level). In congenital heart disease, cyanosis results from defects that allow poorly
oxygenated blood from the right side of the heart to be shunted to the left side, bypassing
the lungs.

Acyanotic lesions include intracardiac or vascular stenoses, valvular regurgitation, and
defects that result in left-to-right shunting of blood. Large left-to-right shunts at the atrial,
ventricular, or great vessel level (all described in the following sections) cause the pulmo-
nary artery volume and pressure to increase and can be associated with the later develop-
ment of pulmonary arteriolar hypertrophy and subsequently increased resistance to f ow.
Over time, the elevated pulmonary resistance may force the direction of the original shunt
to reverse, causing right-to-left fow to supervene, accompanied by the physical findings of
hypoxemia and cyanosis. The development of pulmonary vascular disease as a result of a
chronic large left-to-right shunt is known as Eisenmenger syndrome and is described later
in the chapter.

Patients with congenital heart disease are susceptible to infective endocarditis. Chapter 8
describes the pathophysiology of endocarditis and summarizes the appropriate selection of
patients for antibiotic prophylaxis prior to procedures that can result in bacteremia.

Acyanotic Lesions

Atrial Septal Defect
An atrial septal defect (ASD) is a persistent opening in the interatrial septum after birth that
allows direct communication between the left and right atria. ASDs are relatively common,
occurring with an incidence of 1 in 1,500 live births. They can occur anywhere along the atrial
septum, but the most common site is at the region of the foramen ovale, termed an ostium
‘secundum ASD (Fig. 16-11). This defect arises from inadequate formation of the septum
secundum, excessive resorption of the septum primum, or a combination.

Less commonly, an ASD appears in the inferior portion of the interatrial septum, adjacent
to the AV valves. Named as ostium primum defect, this abnormality results from the failure
of the septum primum to fuse with the endocardial cushions.

A third type of atrial septal abnormality is termed a sinus venosus defect and is closely
related to ASDs but is morphologically distinct. This condition represents an “unroofing”
defect with absence of normal tissue between the right pulmonary vein(s) and the right
atrium but is technically not a deficiency of the anatomic atrial septum (i.e., frequently the
atrial septum itself is fully intact). As sinus venosus defects are often large and result in fow
from the right pulmonary veins and left atrium into the right atrium, the pathophysiology is
similar to that of a true ASD.
Qngenital Heart Disease 383
) — A
is = RA LA
) | =~ ASD
)
\
/ RV | LV
PA | Ao
A B
HGURE16-11. Atrial septal defect (ASD), ostium secundum type. A. The arrow indicates shunted f ow
from the left atrium (LA) into the right atrium (RA). B Schematic representation of blood f ow through an
uncomplicated ASD, resulting in enlargement of the RA, right ventricle (RV), and pulmonary artery (PA). Ao,
aorta; IVC inferior vena cava; LV left ventricle; SVG superior vena cava.

Another distinct condition related to ASDs is patent foramen ovale, which is present in
approximately 20% of the general population. It too is not a true ASD (i.e., no atrial septal
tissue is “missing”) but represents persistence of normal fetal anatomy. As described earlier,
the foramen ovale typically functionally closes in the days after birth, and it is permanently
sealed by the age of 6 months through fusion of the atrial septa. A PFO remains when this
fusion fails to occur.

A PFO is usually clinically silent because the one-way valve, though not sealed, remains
functionally closed since the left atrial pressure is higher than that in the right atrium.
However, a PFO takes on signif cance if the right atrial pressure becomes elevated (e.g., in
states of pulmonary hypertension or right-heart failure), resulting in pathologic right-to-left
intracardiac shunting. In that case, deoxygenated blood passes directly into the arterial circu-
lation. Occasionally, a PFO can be implicated in a patient who has suffered a systemic embo-
lism (e.g., a stroke). This situation, termed paradoxical embolism, occurs when thrombus in.

Pathophysiology
In the case of an uncomplicated ASD, oxygenated blood from the left atrium is shunted
into the right atrium, but not vice versa. Flow through the defect is a function of its size
and the f lling properties (compliance) of the ventricles into which the atria pass their con-
tents. Normally after birth, the RV becomes more compliant than does the LV, owing to the
regression of right ventricular wall thickness and an increase in LV thickness, facilitating
the left-to-right directed shunt at the atrial level, The result is volume overload and enlarge-
‘ment of the right atrium and RV (see Fig. 16-11B). If right ventricular compliance diminishes
over time (because of the excessive load), the left-to-right shunt may lessen. Occasionally, if
384 (chapter 16
severe pulmonary vascular disease develops (e.g., Eisenmenger syndrome), the direction of
the shunt may actually reverse (causing right-to-left f ow), such that desaturated blood enters.

Symptoms
Most infants with ASDs are asymptomatic. The condition may be detected by the presence of
a murmur on routine physical examination during childhood or adolescence, but the exam
findings are subtle and 25% of ASDs are not diagnosed until adulthood. If symptoms do
occur, they include dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, and recurrent lower respiratory tract infec-
tions. The most common symptoms in adults are decreased stamina and palpitations due to
atrial tachyarrhythmias resulting from right atrial enlargement.

Physical Examination
A prominent systolic impulse may be palpated along the lower-left sternal border, repre-
senting contraction of the dilated RV (termed an RV heave). The second heart sound (S,)
demonstrates a widened, fixed splitting pattern (see Chapter 2). This occurs because the
normal respiratory variation in systemic venous return is countered by reciprocal changes
in the volume of blood shunted across the ASD. In addition, the increased volume of blood
f owing across the pulmonary valve often creates a systolic murmur at the upper-left sternal
border. A mid-diastolic murmur may also be present at the lower-left sternal border owing
to the increased fow across the tricuspid valve. Blood traversing the ASD itself does not
produce a murmur because of the absence of a significant pressure gradient between the
atria.

Diagnostic Studies
On chest radiograph, the heart is usually enlarged because of right atrial and right ventricular
dilatation, and the pulmonary artery is prominent with increased pulmonary vascular mark-
ings. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows right ventricular hypertrophy, often with right atrial
enlargement and incomplete or complete right bundle branch block. In patients with the
ostium primum type of ASD, left axis deviation is common and is thought to be a result of dis-
placement and hypoplasia of the left bundle branch’s anterior fascicle. Echocardiography dem-
onstrates right atrial and right ventricular enlargement; the ASD may be visualized directly,
or its presence may be implied by the demonstration of a transatrial shunt by Doppler f ow
assessment. The magnitude and direction of shunt f ow and an estimation of right ventricular

Given the high sensitivity of echocardiography, it is rarely necessary to perform cardiac

catheterization to confirm the presence of an ASD. However, catheterization may be useful
to assess pulmonary vascular resistance and to diagnose concurrent coronary artery disease
in older adults. In a normal person undergoing cardiac catheterization, the oxygen saturation
measured in the right atrium is similar to that in the superior vena cava. However, an ASD
with left-to-right shunting of well-oxygenated blood causes the saturation in the right atrium

Treatment
Most patients with ASDs remain asymptomatic. However, if the volume of shunted blood is
hemodynamically significant (even in the absence of symptoms), elective surgical repair is
‘ease. The defect is repaired by direct suture closure or with a pericardial or synthetic patch.
Congenital Heart Disease 385
In children and young adults, morphologic changes in the right heart often return to normal
after repair. Percutaneous ASD repair, using a closure device deployed via an intravenous
Ventricular Septal Defect
A ventricular septal defect (VSD) is an abnormal opening in the interventricular septum
(Fig. 16-12). VSDs are relatively common, having an incidence of 1.5 to 3.5 per 1,000 live
births. They are most often located in the membranous (70%) and muscular (20%) portions
of the septum. Rare VSDs occur just below the aortic valve or adjacent to the AV valves.
Pathophysiology
The hemodynamic changes and magnitude of the shunt that accompany VSDs depend on the
size of the defect and the relative resistances of the pulmonary and systemic vasculatures. In
vasculature, thereby preventing a significant quantity of left-to-right shunting. Conversely,
with larger “nonrestrictive” defects, the volume of the shunt is determined by the relative
pulmonary and systemic vascular resistances. In the perinatal period, the pulmonary vascu-
lar resistance approximates the systemic vascular resistance, and minimal shunting occurs
between the two ventricles. After birth, however, as the pulmonary vascular resistance falls,
an increasing left-to-right shunt through the defect develops. When this shunt is large, the RV,
pulmonary circulation, left atrium, and LV experience a relative volume overload. Initially,
the increased blood return to the LV augments stroke volume (via the Frank-Starling mecha-
nism); but over time, the increased volume load can result in progressive chamber dilatation,
systolic dysfunction, and symptoms of heart failure. In addition, the augmented circulation
i
) A
|| LA y
is RA
Y] SVC |
Ba
U
\ LA
|
RV LV ¥
ab VSD
<_——
RA |
we) WV PA Ao
RV
IVC
A B
HGURE16-12. Ventricular septal defect (VSD). A. The arrow indicates shunted f ow from the left ventricle
(LV) toward the right ventricular (RV) outf ow tract. B. Schematic representation of blood f ow through an
uncomplicated VSD. The dashed lines represent increased blood return to the left side of the heart as a result
of the shunt, which causes enlargement primarily of the left atrium (LA) and LV Ao, aorta; IVC inferior vena
cava; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; SVE superior vena cava.
386 Chapter 16
through the pulmonary vasculature can cause pulmonary vascular disease as early as 2 years
of age. As pulmonary vascular resistance eventually approaches or exceeds systemic resis-

Symptoms
Patients with small VSDs typically remain symptom free. Conversely, 10% of infants with
VSDs have large defects and develop early symptoms of heart failure, including tachypnea,
poor feeding, failure to thrive, and frequent lower respiratory tract infections. Patients with
pnea and cyanosis. Bacterial endocarditis (see Chapter 8) can develop, regardless of the size
of the VSD.

Physical Examination
The most common physical finding is a harsh holosystolic murmur that is best heard at the
left sternal border. Smaller defects tend to have the loudest murmurs because of the great
turbulence of f ow that they cause. A systolic thrill can commonly be palpated over the region
of the murmur. In addition, a mid-diastolic rumbling murmur can often be heard at the apex
owing to the increased f ow across the mitral valve. If pulmonary vascular disease develops,
the holosystolic murmur diminishes as the pressure gradient across the defect decreases. In
such patients, an RV heave, a loud pulmonic closure sound (P;), and cyanosis may be evident.

Diagnostic Studies
On chest radiographs, the cardiac silhouette may be normal in patients with small defects,
but in those with large shunts, cardiomegaly and prominent pulmonary vascular markings
are present. If pulmonary vascular disease has developed, enlarged pulmonary arteries with
peripheral tapering may be evident. The ECG shows left atrial enlargement and left ventricular
hypertrophy in those with a large shunt, and right ventricular hypertrophy is usually evident
if pulmonary vascular disease has developed. Echocardiography with Doppler studies can
accurately determine the location of the VSD, identify the direction and magnitude of the
shunt, and provide an estimate of right ventricular systolic pressure. Cardiac catheterization
demonstrates increased oxygen saturation in the RV compared with the right atrium, the
result of shunting of highly oxygenated blood from the LV into the RV.

Treatment
By age 2, at least 50% of small and moderate-sized VSDs undergo sufficient partial or com-
plete spontaneous closure to make intervention unnecessary. Surgical correction of the defect
is recommended in the first few months of life for children with accompanying heart failure
or pulmonary vascular hypertension. Moderate-sized defects without pulmonary vascular
disease but with significant left-to-right shunting can be corrected later in childhood. Less-
invasive catheter-based treatments are also used in selected patients.

Patent Ductus Arteriosus
The ductus arteriosus is the vessel that connects the pulmonary artery to the descending aorta
during fetal life. PDA results when the ductus fails to close after birth, resulting in a persistent
connection between the great vessels (Fig. 16-13). It has an overall incidence of about 1 in
2,500 to 5,000 live term births. Risk factors for its presence include first trimester maternal
Congenital Heart Disease 387
H
1 a
|| LA ¥
y| | nN RA
Oo
rH sve [= qj
PA
) |
!
RV LV 4
: )
1
i]
i]
| |e]
<_——
I PDA |
A B
HGURE 16-13. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). A. The arrow indicates shunted f ow from the descending
aorta (Ao) toward the pulmonary artery (PA). B. Schematic representation of blood f ow through an
uncomplicated PDA The dashed lines represent increased blood return to the left side of the heart as a result
of the shunt, which causes enlargement of the left atrium (LA), left ventricle (LV), and Ao. [VG inferior vena
cava; RA, right atrium; RV right ventricle; SVC superior vena cava.
Pathophysiology
As described earlier, the smooth muscle of the ductus arteriosus usually constricts after
lating prostaglandins. Over the next several weeks, intimal proliferation and fibrosis result
in permanent closure. Failure of the ductus to close results in a persistent shunt between
the descending aorta and the left pulmonary artery. The magnitude of fow through the
shunt depends on the cross-sectional area and length of the ductus itself as well as the
relative resistances of the systemic and pulmonary vasculatures. Prenatally, when the pul-
monary vascular resistance is high, blood is diverted away from the immature lungs to
the aorta. As the pulmonary resistance drops postnatally, the shunt reverses direction, and
blood fows from the aorta into the pulmonary circulation instead. Because of this left-to-
right shunt, the pulmonary circulation, left atrium, and LV become volume overloaded.
This can lead to left ventricular dilatation and left-sided heart failure, whereas the right
heart remains normal unless pulmonary vascular disease ensues. If the latter does develop,
pulmonary artery, through the ductus, to the descending aorta. In this case, the resulting
fow of desaturated blood to the lower extremities causes cyanosis of the feet; the upper
extremities are not cyanotic, because they receive normally saturated blood from the aorta
Symptoms
Children with small PDAs are generally asymptomatic. Those with large left-to-right shunts
develop early congestive heart failure with tachycardia, poor feeding, slow growth, and recur-
rent lower respiratory tract infections. Moderate-sized lesions can present with fatigue, dys-
pnea, and palpitations in adolescence and adult life. Atrial fibrillation may occur owing to
388 Chapter 16
left atrial dilatation. Turbulent blood f ow across the defect can set the stage for endovascular

Physical Examination
The most common finding in a patient with a left-to-right shunt through a PDA is a continu-
ous, machine-like murmur (see Fig. 2-10), heard best at the left subclavicular region. The
murmur is present throughout the cardiac cycle because a pressure gradient exists between
the aorta and pulmonary artery in both systole and diastole. However, if pulmonary vascu-
‘stolic component may disappear). If Eisenmenger syndrome develops, lower extremity cya-
nosis and clubbing may be present as poorly oxygenated blood is shunted to the descending

Diagnostic Studies
With a large PDA, the chest radiograph shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette (left atrial and
left ventricular enlargement) with prominent pulmonary vascular markings. In adults, cal-
cification of the ductus may be visualized. The ECG shows left atrial enlargement and left
ventricular hypertrophy when a large shunt is present. Echocardiography with Doppler imag-
pressures. Cardiac catheterization is usually unnecessary for diagnostic purposes. When per-
formed in patients with a left-to-right shunt, it demonstrates a step up in oxygen saturation

Treatment
In the absence of other congenital cardiac abnormalities or severe pulmonary vascular dis-
ease, a PDA should generally be therapeutically occluded. Although many spontaneously
close during the first months after birth, this rarely occurs later. Given the constant risk of
endarteritis and the minimal complications of corrective procedures, even a small asymptom-
atic PDA is commonly referred for closure. For neonates and premature infants with conges-
tive heart failure, a trial of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors (e.g., indomethacin) can be
administered in an attempt to constrict the ductus. Definitive closure can be accomplished by
surgical division or ligation of the ductus or by transcatheter techniques in which an occlud-
ing device is placed.

Qngenital Aortic Stenosis
Congenital aortic stenosis (AS) is most often caused by abnormal structural development
of the valve leafets. It occurs in 5 of 10,000 live births and is four times as common in
‘males as in females. Twenty percent of patients have an additional abnormality, most com-
‘monly coarctation of the aorta (discussed later). The aortic valve in congenital AS usually
has a bicuspid leaf et structure instead of the normal three-leaf et configuration, causing
an eccentric stenotic opening through which blood is ejected. Most bicuspid aortic valves
are actually nonobstructive at birth and therefore only rarely result in congenital AS. More
often, bicuspid valves become progressively stenotic over a great many years, as the leaf-
lets progressively fibrose and calcify, and represent a common cause of AS in adults (see
Chapter 8).
Qngenital Heart Disease 389
Pathophysiology
Because the valvular orif ce is signif cantly narrowed, left ventricular systolic pressure must
load, the LV hypertrophies (Fig. 16-14). The high-velocity jet of blood that passes through the
stenotic valve may impact the proximal aortic wall and contribute to dilatation of that vessel.
Symptoms
The clinical picture of AS depends on the severity of the lesion. Fewer than 10% of infants
experience symptoms of heart failure before age 1, but if they do, they manifest tachycar-
dia, tachypnea, failure to thrive, and poor feeding. Most older children with congenital AS are
‘asymptomatic and develop normally. When symptoms do occur, they are similar to those of
adult AS and include fatigue, exertional dyspnea, angina pectoris, and syncope (see Chapter 8).
Physical Examination
Auscultation reveals a harsh crescendo—decrescendo systolic murmur, loudest at the base of
the heart with radiation toward the neck. It is often preceded by a systolic ejection click (see
Chapter 2), especially when a bicuspid valve is present. Unlike the murmurs of ASD, VSD, or
PDA, the murmur of congenital AS is characteristically present from birth because it does not
depend on the postnatal decline in pulmonary vascular resistance. With advanced disease,
the ejection time becomes longer, causing the peak of the murmur to occur later in systole. In
severe disease, the signif cantly prolonged ejection time causes a delay in closure of the aortic
valve such that A, occurs after P,—a phenomenon known as reversed splitting (also termed
“paradoxical splitting”) of S, (see Chapter 2).
yo &
U LA
|_| RA
4 ~
is
\)
RV LV
PA Ao 2
A B
HGURE16-14. Q@ngenital aortic valve stenosis. A. The jagged arrow traverses the narrowed aortic valve.
B Schematic representation of obstructed f ow through the narrowed aortic valve (jagged arrow). Left
ventricular (LV) hypertrophy results from the chronically increased pressure load. Poststenotic dilatation of
the aorta (Ao) is common. IVC inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium;
RV right ventricle; SVG superior vena cava.
390 chapter 16
Diagnostic Studies
The chest radiograph of an infant with AS may show an enlarged LV and a dilated ascend-
ing aorta. The ECG often shows left ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography identifies the
abnormal structure of the aortic valve and the degree of left ventricular hypertrophy. Doppler
assessment can accurately measure the pressure gradient across the stenotic valve and allow
Treatment
closely as the degree of stenosis may worsen over time. Severe obstruction of the aortic valve
during infancy may mandate immediate repair. Transcatheter balloon valvuloplasty is the first
line of intervention, but surgical repair may be necessary if valvuloplasty fails to relieve the
obstruction or if significant aortic regurgitation results from balloon dilation. Often, valvulo-
plasty in infancy is only palliative, and repeat catheter balloon dilation or surgical revision is
needed later.
Pulmonic Stenosis
(e.g., from congenitally fused valve commissures), within the body of the RV (i.e., in the RV
outf ow tract), or in the pulmonary artery. Valvular pulmonic stenosis is the most frequent
form (Fig. 16-15).
)| “a
|_| RA
is = LA
)|
Ls
)
\
RV LV
A B
HGURE16-15. Q@ngenital pulmonary valve stenosis. A. The jagged arrow traverses the narrowed pulmonary
valve. B. Schematic representation of obstructed f ow through the narrowed pulmonary valve (jagged arrow).
Right ventricular hypertrophy results from the chronically increased pressure load. Ao, aorta; [VG inferior
vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV right ventricle; SVC
superior vena cava.
Congenital Heart Disease 391
Pathophysiology
The consequence of pulmonic stenosis is impairment of right ventricular outf ow, which
leads to increased RV pressures and chamber hypertrophy. The clinical course is determined
by the severity of the obstruction. Although mild pulmonic stenosis rarely progresses and is
unlikely to affect RV function, untreated severe pulmonic stenosis typically results in right-
Symptoms
Children with mild or moderate pulmonary stenosis are asymptomatic. The diagnosis is
often first made on discovery of a murmur during a routine physical examination. Severe
Physical Examination
The physical findings in pulmonic stenosis depend on the severity of the obstruction. If
the stenosis is severe with accompanying right ventricular hypertrophy, a prominent jugu-
lar venous a wave can be observed (see Chapter 2) and an RV heave is palpated over the
sternum. A loud, late-peaking, crescendo—decrescendo systolic ejection murmur is heard
at the upper left sternal border, often associated with a palpable thrill. Widened splitting
of the S, with a soft P, component is caused by the delayed closure of the stenotic pulmo-
nary valve.

In more moderate stenosis, a pulmonic ejection sound (a high-pitched “click”) follows S,
and precedes the systolic murmur. It occurs during the early phase of right ventricular con-
traction as the stenotic valve leaf ets suddenly reach their maximum level of ascent into the
pulmonary artery, just before blood ejection. Unlike other sounds and murmurs produced
by the right side of the heart, the pulmonic ejection sound diminishes in intensity during

Diagnostic Studies
The chest radiograph may demonstrate an enlarged right atrium and ventricle with postste-
blood against the wall of the pulmonary artery). The ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy
with right axis deviation. Echocardiography with Doppler imaging assesses the pulmonary
valve morphology, determines the presence of right ventricular hypertrophy, and accurately
measures the pressure gradient across the obstruction.

Treatment
Mild pulmonic stenosis usually does not progress or require treatment. Moderate or
severe valvular obstruction at the valvular level can be relieved by dilating the stenotic
valve by means of transcatheter balloon valvuloplasty. Long-term results of this proce-
dure have been uniformly excellent, and right ventricular hypertrophy usually regresses
subsequently.
392 chapter 16
@arctation of the Aorta
Coarctation of the aorta typically consists >—Le fi subclavian
of a discrete narrowing of the aortic lumen 7 anery
(Fig. 16-16). This anomaly hasan incidence of Aortic arch | Coaretation
1 in 6,000 live births, and the most common =
associated cardiac abnormality is a bicuspid ~~ |
: : . Constricted V ' \
aortic valve. Aortic coarctation often occurs in ductus a i
patients with Turner syndrome (45, XO). f | \

In the past, coarctations were described sail \
as either “preductal” (infantile) or “post- \
ductal” (adult-type) based on the location | =i
of the aortic narrowing in relation to the / =

. Pulmonary
ductus arteriosus. These terms have been i artery
largely abandoned because the vast major-
ity of coarctations are actually juxtaductal HIGURE16-16. Qarctation of the aorta. A pressure
(i.e., “next to” the ductus) and etiologic gradient is present across the narrowed lumen of the
differences between the preductal and post- aorta.
ductal categories have not been substantiated.

While the actual pathogenesis of aortic coarctation has not been defined, one theory con-
tends that reduced antegrade blood f ow through the left side of the heart and ascending aorta
during fetal life leads to hypoplastic development of the aorta (“no f ow, no grow”). Another the-
ory is that ectopic muscular ductus arteriosus tissue extends into the aorta during fetal life and
constricts following birth at the same time the ductus is caused to close. More recent evidence
suggests that aortic coarctation may be just one manifestation of a more diffuse aortic disease.

Pathophysiology
Because of the impedance of aortic narrowing in coarctation, the LV faces an increased afterload.
Blood f ow to the head and upper extremities is preserved because the vessels supplying these areas
‘usually branch off the aorta proximal to the obstruction, but f ow to the descending aorta and lower
extremities may be diminished. If coarctation is not corrected, compensatory alterations include
(1) development of left ventricular hypertrophy and (2) dilatation of collateral blood vessels from
the intercostal arteries that bypass the coarctation and provide blood to the more distal descending
aorta. Eventually, these collateral vessels enlarge and can erode the undersurface of the ribs.

Symptoms
Patients with severe coarctation usually present very shortly after birth with symptoms of
heart failure. Infants may also exhibit differential cyanosis if the ductus arteriosus fails to
constrict and remains patent. The upper half of the body, supplied by the LV and the ascend-
ing aorta, is perfused with well-oxygenated blood; however, the lower half appears cyanotic
because it is largely supplied by right-to-left f ow of poorly oxygenated blood from the pulmo-
nary artery, across the PDA, and into the descending aorta, beyond the coarctation.

When the coarctation is less severe, a patient may be asymptomatic or experience only
mild weakness or pain in the lower extremities following exercise (1.e., claudication). In
asymptomatic cases, coarctation may be suspected by the finding of upper extremity hyper-
tension later in life (see Chapter 13).

Physical Examination
On examination, the femoral pulses are weak and delayed. An elevated blood pressure in the
upper body is the most common finding. If the coarctation occurs distal to the takeoff of the left
Qongenital Heart Disease 393
subclavian artery, the systolic pressure in the arms is greater than that in the legs. If the coarcta-
tion occurs proximal to the takeoff of the left subclavian artery, the systolic pressure in the right
‘arm may exceed that in the left arm. A systolic pressure in the right arm that is 15 to 20 mm Hg
greater than that in a leg is sufficient to suspect coarctation, because normally the systolic pres-
sure in the legs is higher than that in the arms. A midsystolic ejection murmur (caused by tur-
bulent fow through the coarctation) may be audible over the chest and/or back. A prominent
tortuous collateral arterial circulation may create continuous murmurs over the chest in adults.

Diagnostic Studies
In adults with uncorrected coarctation of the aorta, chest radiography generally reveals notch-.
ing of the inferior surface of the posterior ribs owing to enlarged intercostal vessels supplying
collateral circulation to the descending aorta. An indented aorta at the site of coarctation may
also be visualized. The ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy resulting from the pressure
load placed on that chamber. Doppler echocardiography confirms the diagnosis of coarctation
and assesses the pressure gradient across the lesion. Magnetic resonance (or CT) imaging
demonstrates in detail the length and severity of coarctation (see Fig. 16-17). Diagnostic cath-
eterization and angiography are rarely necessary.

Treatment
In neonates with severe obstruction, prostaglandin infusion is administered to keep the duc-
tus arteriosus patent, thus maintaining blood f ow to the descending aorta before surgery is
undertaken. In children, elective repair is usually performed to prevent systemic hyperten-
sion. Several effective surgical procedures are available, including excision of the narrowed
aortic segment with end-to-end reanastomosis and direct repair of the coarctation, sometimes
using synthetic patch material. For older children, adults, and patients with recurrent coarcta-
tion after previous repair, transcatheter interventions (balloon dilatation with or without stent
placement) are usually successful.

Cyanotic Lesions

. ae .
Tetralogy of Fallot \ ~\
e —-_ -
Tetralogy of Fallot results from a single devel- TAA i
opmental defect: an abnormal anterior and ; & se :
cephalad displacement of the infundibular ah ‘a -_
(outf ow tract) portion of the interventricu- : S
lar septum. As a consequence, four anoma- . LA ; %
lies arise that characterize this condition, as RA pi *, 5
shown in Figure 16-18: (1) a VSD caused \ J A ’
by anterior malalignment of the interven- =f y
tricular septum, (2) subvalvular pulmonic LIVER -
stenosis because of obstruction from the :
displaced infundibular septum (often with : AY
valvular pulmonic stenosis), (3) an over- - )
riding aorta that receives blood from both
ventricles, and (4) right ventricular hyper- FIGURE 16-17, Magnetic resonance imaging
trophy owing to the high-pressure load of coarctation of the aorta. This lateral view .
demonstrates coarctation, manifest as a focal aortic

placed on the RV by the pulmonic stenosis. narrowing (white arrow). AA, ascending aorta; DA,
Tetralogy of Fallot is the most common form descending aorta; LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium;
of cyanotic congenital heart disease after TAA transverse aortic arch.
394 Chapter 16
\|
: :
LS
I t
Or:
Overriding
SS (/ aorta
HGURE 16-18. Tetralogy of Fallot is characterized
by four associated anomalies. (1) A ventricular septal
defect, (2) obstruction to right ventricular outf ow
(jagged arrow), (3) an overriding aorta that receives
a blood from both ventricles, and (4) right ventricular
Ventricular hypertrophy. Ao, aorta; IVC inferior vena cava; LA, left
septal defect Right ventricular atrium; LV left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right
hypertrophy atrium; RV right ventricle; SVG superior vena cava.
infancy, occurring in 5 of 10,000 live births and is often associated with other cardiac defects,
including a right-sided aortic arch (25% of patients), ASD (10% of patients), and less often,
an anomalous origin of the left coronary artery. A microdeletion in chromosome 22 (22q11)
has been identif ed in patients with a syndrome that includes tetralogy of Fallot as one of the
cardiovascular manifestations (see Box 16-1).
a
BOX 16-1 Genetic Abnormalities in @ngenital Heart Disease
Progress in understanding of genetic inf uences on cardiac development and congenital heart
disease is proceeding at a brisk pace. Although nearly all cardiac congenital anomalies can occur
as isolated findings, the clustering of certain forms with heritable syndromes and known genetic
abnormalities provides clues to the underlying basis of certain defects.
Among infants with Down syndrome (trisomy 21), the incidence of congenital heart defects
is nearly 40%. Many of these are common abnormalities such as ASDs, VSDs, and PDAs. There is
also a high incidence of a rarer condition known as common AV canal, which consists of a large
primum ASD and VSD and a common (undivided) AV valve. These central heart structures are
usually formed by the endocardial cushions and cells of neural crest origin, which are known to
have abnormal migration patterns in patients with trisomy 21.
Tumer syndrome (45, XD) is another heritable condition associated with congenital heart
disease. Left-sided obstructive congenital heart lesions are common in patients with this
syndrome, including bicuspid aortic valve, coarctation of the aorta, and occasionally hypoplastic
left heart syndrome (underdevelopment of the LVand aorta). The specific genes responsible for
these abnormalities have not yet been elucidated.
In contrast, discrete gene abnormalities have been identified in other syndrome-associated
forms of congenital heart disease. Many patients with Williams syndrome (characterized by mental
retardation, hypercalcemia, renovascular hypertension, facial abnormalities, and short stature) have
supravalvular AS, and some have a more diffuse arteriopathy of the aorta as well as pulmonary
artery obstruction. The genetic abnormality in Williams syndrome is a deletion on chromosome 7
Congenital Heart Disease 395
a
BOX16-1 (Genetic Abnormalities in @ngenital Heart
Disease (continued)
(7q11.23), a region that includes the elastin gene. Abnormalities in the production of elastin, a
critical component of the arterial wall, may be responsible for the observed arteriopathy.
DiGeorge syndrome (characterized by pharyngeal defects, hypocalcemia due to absent
parathyroid glands, and T-cell dysfunction secondary to hypoplasia of the thymus) is associated
with congenital abnormalities of the cardiac outf ow tracts, including tetralogy of Fallot, truncus
arteriosus (a large VSD over which a single large outf ow vessel arises), and interrupted aortic
arch. Mbst patients with DiGeorge syndrome have a microdeletion within chromosome 22 (22q11),
a region that contains the TBXI gene. This gene encodes a transcription factor that appears to
play a critical role in developmental patterning of the cardiac outf ow tracts.
CHARGE syndrome (the acronym for coloboma [congenital absence of portions of eye
structures], heart defects, choanal atresia [nasal passage obstruction], retardation of growth and
development, genitourinary malformation, ear abnormalities) is an autosomal dominant disorder
that includes some or all of the listed components. Associated cardiac abnormalities include
interrupted aortic arch, tetralogy of Fallot, double outlet right ventricle, and AV septal defects.
The incidence of the syndrome is approximately 1:10,000 children, and most are found to have
a mutation or microdeletion in the CHD/ gene, the protein product of which is a transcription
regulator associated with several tissue-specific target genes.
Several other transcription factors involved in heart development likely contribute to
congenital heart disease. Some families with heritable forms of ASDs have mutations in the
transcription factor gene Nkx2.5. An associated transcription factor gene GAIM4 appears to
collaborate with Nxx2.5 and has also been implicated in familial septal defect syndromes.
Mitations in TBXS, yet another transcription factor gene, are responsible for Holt-Oram
syndrome (also known as the heart—hand syndrome), an autosomal dominant disorder whose
characteristic cardiac defects include secundum ASDs and VSDs.
Further deciphering of the genome will undoubtedly improve understanding of cardiac
development and the molecular defects that lead to congenital heart abnormalities.
Pathophysiology
Increased resistance by the subvalvular pulmonic stenosis causes deoxygenated blood return-
‘ing from the systemic veins to be diverted from the RV, through the VSD to the LV, and into
the systemic circulation, resulting in systemic hypoxemia and cyanosis. The magnitude of
shunt f ow across the VSD is primarily a function of the severity of the pulmonary stenosis,
but acute changes in systemic and pulmonary vascular resistances can affect it as well.
Symptoms
Children with tetralogy of Fallot often experience dyspnea on exertion. “Spells” may occur fol-
lowing exertion, feeding, or crying when systemic vasodilatation results in an increased right-
to-left shunt. Manifestations of such spells include irritability, cyanosis, hyperventilation, and
occasionally syncope or convulsions. Children learn to alleviate their symptoms by squatting
down, which is thought to increase systemic vascular resistance by “kinking” the femoral arter-
ies, thereby decreasing the right-to-left shunt and directing more blood from the RV to the lungs.
Physical Examination
Children with tetralogy of Fallot and moderate pulmonary stenosis often have mild cyanosis,
most notably of the lips, mucous membranes, and digits. Infants with severe pulmonary
stenosis may present with profound cyanosis in the first few days of life. Chronic hypoxemia
396 Chapter 16
caused by the right-to-left shunt commonly results in clubbing of the fingers and toes. Right
ventricular hypertrophy may be appreciated on physical examination as a palpable heave
along the left sternal border. The S, is single, composed of a normal aortic component; the
pulmonary component is soft and usually inaudible. A systolic ejection murmur heard best
at the upper left sternal border is created by turbulent blood fow through the stenotic right
ventricular outf ow tract. There is usually no distinct murmur related to the VSD, because it
is typically large and thus generates little turbulence.

Diagnostic Studies
Chest radiography demonstrates prominence of the RV and decreased size of the main pul-
monary artery segment, giving the appearance of a “boot-shaped” heart. Pulmonary vascular
markings are typically diminished because of decreased f ow through the pulmonary circula-
tion. The ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy with right axis deviation, Echocardiography
details the right ventricular outfow tract anatomy, the malaligned VSD, right ventricular
hypertrophy, and other associated defects, as does cardiac catheterization.

Treatment
Before definitive surgical correction of tetralogy of Fallot was developed, several forms
of palliative therapy were undertaken. These involved creating anatomic communications
between the aorta (or one of its major branches) to the pulmonary artery, establishing
a left-to-right shunt to increase pulmonary blood f ow. Such procedures are occasionally
used today in infants for whom definitive repair is planned at an older age. Complete sur-
gical correction of tetralogy of Fallot involves closure of the VSD and enlargement of the
subpulmonary infundibulum with the use of a pericardial patch. Elective repair is usually
recommended at 6 to 12 months of age to
decrease the likelihood of future complica-
tions. Most patients who have undergone
successful repair grow to become asymp-
tomatic adults. However, antibiotic pro-
phylaxis to prevent endocarditis is required J] A
‘in some patients (see Chapter 8). oo

HW svc \ |

Transposition of the Geat Arteries 1 SS Ao
In transposition of the great arteries (TGAs), \
each great vessel inappropriately arises from
the opposite ventricle; that is, the aorta
originates from the RV and the pulmonary RA
artery originates from the LV (Fig. 16-19).
This anomaly accounts for approximately
7% of congenital heart defects, affecting 40
of 100,000 live births. Whereas tetralogy of RV
Fallot is the most common etiology of cya-
nosis after infancy, TGA is the most common
cause of cyanosis in the neonatal period. |

The precise cause of transposition _. .
. HGURE 16-19. Transposition of the great arteries.

remains unknown. One theory contends The aorta (Ao) and pulmonary artery (PA) arise
that failure of the aorticopulmonary septum abnormally from the right ventricle (RV) and left
to spiral in a normal fashion during fetal ventricle (LV), respectively. IVG inferior vena cava; LA,
development is the underlying problem. It _ left atrium; RA right atrium; SVG superior vena cava.
Congenital Heart Disease 397
has also been suggested that the defect may be the result of abnormal growth and absorption
of the subpulmonary and subaortic infundibuli during the division of the truncus arteriosus.
Normally, reabsorption of the subaortic infundibulum places the forming aortic valve poste-
rior and inferior to the pulmonary valve and in continuity with the LV. In TGA, the process of
infundibular reabsorption may be reversed, placing the pulmonary valve over the LV instead.

Pathophysiology

TGA separates the pulmonary and systemic circulations by placing the two circuits in parallel
rather than in series. This arrangement forces desaturated blood from the systemic venous sys-
Without intervention to create mixing between the two circulations, TGA is a lethal condition.
men ovale allows communication between the two circulations. Oxygenated fetal blood f ows
from the placenta through the umbilical vein to the right atrium, and then most of it travels
into the left atrium through the foramen ovale. The oxygenated blood in the left atrium passes
into the LV and is pumped out the pulmonary artery. Most of the pulmonary artery fow
travels through the ductus arteriosus into the aorta, instead of the high-resistance pulmonary
vessels, such that oxygen is provided to the developing tissues.

After birth, normal physiologic closure of the ductus and the foramen ovale eliminates
because oxygenated blood does not reach the systemic tissues. However, if the ductus arte-
riosus and foramen ovale remain patent (either naturally or with exogenous prostaglandins
or surgical intervention), communication between the parallel circuits is maintained, and suf-
ficiently oxygenated blood may be provided to the brain and other vital organs.

Symptoms and Physical Examination
Infants with transposition appear blue, with the intensity of the cyanosis dependent on
the degree of intermixing between the parallel circuits. In most cases, generalized cyanosis.
Palpation of the chest reveals a right ventricular impulse at the lower sternal border as the RV
faces systemic pressures. Auscultation may reveal an accentuated S,, which ref ects closure of
the anteriorly placed aortic valve just under the chest wall. Prominent murmurs are uncom-
mon and may signal an additional defect.

Diagnostic Studies
Chest radiography is usually normal, although the base of the heart may be narrow owing
to the more anterior—posterior orientation of the aorta and pulmonary artery. The ECG
demonstrates right ventricular hypertrophy, refecting the fact that the RV is the systemic
“high-pressure” pumping chamber. The definitive diagnosis of transposition can be made by
echocardiography, which demonstrates the abnormal orientation of the great vessels.

Treatment
TGA is a medical emergency. Initial treatment includes maintenance of the ductus arteriosus.
eter (termed the Rashkind procedure). Such intervention allows adequate mixing of the two
398 Chapter 16
circulations until definitive corrective surgery can be performed. The current corrective proce-
dure of choice is the “arterial switch” operation (Jatene procedure), which involves transection.
of the great vessels above the semilunar valves and origin of the coronary arteries. The great
vessels are then reversed to the natural configuration, so the aorta arises from the LV and the
pulmonary artery arises from the RV. The coronary arteries are then relocated to the new aorta.
EISENMENGER SYNDROVE
Eisenmenger syndrome is the condition of severe pulmonary vascular obstruction that results
from chronic left-to-right shunting through a congenital cardiac defect. The elevated pulmo-
nary vascular resistance causes reversal of the original shunt (to the right-to-left direction)
and systemic cyanosis.

The mechanism by which increased pulmonary fow causes this condition is unknown.
Histologically, the pulmonary arteriolar media hypertrophies and the intima proliferates,
reducing the cross-sectional area of the pulmonary vascular bed. Over time, the vessels
become thrombosed, and the resistance of the pulmonary vasculature rises, causing the origi-
nal left-to-right shunt to decrease. Eventually, if the resistance of the pulmonary circulation
exceeds that of the systemic vasculature, the direction of shunt f ow reverses.

With reversal of the shunt to the right-to-left direction, symptoms arise from hypoxemia,
including exertional dyspnea and fatigue. Reduced hemoglobin saturation stimulates the bone
marrow to produce more red blood cells (erythrocytosis), which can lead to hyperviscosity,
symptoms of which include fatigue, headaches, and stroke (caused by cerebrovascular occlu-
sion). Infarction or rupture of the pulmonary vessels can result in hemoptysis.

On examination, a patient with Eisenmenger syndrome appears cyanotic with digital club-
bing. A prominent a wave in the jugular venous pulsation ref ects elevated right-sided pres-
sure during atrial contraction. A loud P, is common. The murmur of the inciting left-to-right
shunt is usually absent, because the original pressure gradient across the lesion is negated by
the elevated right-heart pressures.

Chest radiography in Eisenmenger syndrome is notable for proximal pulmonary artery
dilatation with peripheral tapering. Calcification of the pulmonary vasculature may be
seen. The ECG demonstrates right ventricular hypertrophy and right atrial enlargement.
Echocardiography with Doppler studies can usually identify the underlying cardiac defect and
quantitate the pulmonary artery systolic pressure.

Treatment includes the avoidance of activities that can exacerbate the right-to-left shunt.
These include strenuous physical activity, high altitude, and the use of peripheral vasodila-
tor drugs. Pregnancy is especially dangerous; the rate of spontaneous abortion is 20% to
40%, and the incidence of maternal mortality is approximately 45%. Supportive measures
for Eisenmenger syndrome include prompt treatment of infections, management of rhythm
disturbances, and phlebotomy for patients with symptomatic erythrocytosis.

Although there are no remedies that reverse the disease process in Eisenmenger syndrome,
pulmonary vasodilator therapy can provide symptomatic relief and improve the patient's
quality of life. Effective agents include endothelin receptor antagonists, prostacyclin analogs,
and phosphodiesterase inhibitors (see Chapter 17). The only effective long-term strategy for
severely affected patients is lung or heart—lung transplantation. Fortunately, with the dramatic
advances that have been made in the detection and early correction of severe congenital heart
defects, Eisenmenger syndrome has become less common.

SUMVIARY
° Formation of the cardiovascular system begins during the 3rd week of embryonic devel-
opment; soon after, a unique circulation develops that allows the fetus to mature in the
uterus, using the placenta as the primary organ of gas, nutrient, and waste exchange.
Congenital Heart Disease 399

e At birth, the fetal lungs inf ate and become functional, making the placenta unnecessary and
altering circulation patterns to allow the neonate to adjust to life outside the womb.

° Cardiac malformations occur in 0.8% of live births, representing the most common form of
birth defects and the leading cause of death from birth abnormalities in the first year of life.

° Congenital heart lesions can be grouped into cyanotic or acyanotic defects, depending on
whether the abnormality results in right-to-left shunting of blood.

e Acyanotic defects often result in either volume overload (ASD, VSD, PDA) or pressure over-
load (AS, pulmonic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta).

° Chronic volume overload resulting from a large left-to-right shunt can ultimately result in
increased pulmonary vascular resistance, reversal of the direction of shunt f ow, and subse-
quent cyanosis (Eisenmenger syndrome).

e Among the most common cyanotic defects are tetralogy of Fallot and transposition of the
great arteries.

Acknowledgments

Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were David D. Berg, MD; Vijay G. Sankaran,

MD; Yi-Bin Chen, MD; Douglas W. Green, MD; Raymond Tabibiazar, MD; Lakshmi

Halasyamani, MD; Andrew Karson, MD; Michael D. Freed, MD; and Richard Liberthson, MD.

Additional Reading

Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, et al., eds. Moss and Perloff JK. The Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart
Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents: Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012.

Including the Fetus and Young Adult. 8th ed. Philadelphia, Pierpont ME, Basson CT, Benson DW Jr, et al. Genetic basis
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013. for congenital heart defects: current knowledge: a scientific

Bruneau BG. The developmental genetics of congenital heart statement from the American Heart Association Congenital
disease. Nature. 2008;451:943—948. Cardiac Defects Committee, Council on Cardiovascular

Kemper AR, Mahle WT, Martin GR, et al. Strategies for Disease in the Young: endorsed by the American Academy
implementing screening for critical congenital heart disease. of Pediatrics. Circulation. 2007;115:3015—3038.

Pediatrics. 2011;128:e1259-e1267. Sadler TW. Langman’s Medical Embryology. 12th ed.

Moore KL, Persaud TVN. The Developing Human: Clinically Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012.
Oriented Embryology. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, et al. ACC/ AHA 2008
2013. Guidelines for the management of adults with congeni-

Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 6th ed. tal heart disease: executive summary. J Am Coll Cardiol.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2014. 2008;52:1890-1947.
' 6
‘ é ' o-€ iy
“
A
Cardiovascular Drugs
Andrey V. Dolinko \
Michael T. Kuntz ‘4
Elliott M. Antman
Gary R. Strichartz
Leonard S. Lilly *
Chapter Outline
Inotropic Drugs and Diuretics
Vas opressors Loop Diuretics
Cardiac Gycosides (Digitalis) ‘ Thiazide” Druretics
Sympathomimetic Amines Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
Phosphodiesterase-3 Inhibitors _ Antithrombotic Drugs
Vasopressin Platelet Inhibitors
Vasodilator Drugs Anticoagulant Drugs: Parenteral Agents
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Anticoagulant Drugs: Oral Agents
Inhibitors ipi i
Angiotensin II Type | Receptor
Antagonists
Direct-Acting Vasodilators
Calcium Channel Blockers Nacin
Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitors
Antiadrenergic Drugs T his chapter reviews the physiologic basis and clinical use
Central Adrenergic Inhibitors of cardiovascular drugs. Although a multitude of drugs
(CNS a,-Agonists) are available to treat cardiac disorders, these agents can be
Sympathetic Nerve-Fnding grouped by their pharmacologic actions into a small number of
Antagonists categories. Additionally, many drugs are useful in more than one
Peripheral a-Adrenergic
form of heart disease.
Receptor Antagonists
ae
