.
i i
Diseases of the Ve
5 | a
Peripheral Vasculature |. |
—_-
Sruthi Renati
Mark A. Creager
——
Chapter Outline P eripheral vascular disease is an umbrella term that includes
—==——Es= a number of diverse pathologic entities that affect arteries,
Diseases of the Aorta veins, and lymphatics. Although this terminology makes a dis-
Aortic Aneurysms a 5
Aortic Dissection tinction between the “central” coronary and “peripheral” sys-
Peripheral Artery Diseases temic vessels, the vasculature as a whole comprises a dynamic,
Peripheral Atherosclerotic integrated, and multifunctional organ system that does not
Vascular Disease naturally comply with this semantic division.
Acute Arterial Occlusion Blood vessels serve many critical functions. Hirst, they
Vasculitic Syndromes regulate the differential distribution of blood and delivery
Vasospasm: Raynaud ; .
Phenomenon of nutrients and oxygen to tissues. Second, blood vessels
ReToue TRSCate actively synthesize and secrete vasoactive substances that
Varicose Veins regulate vascular tone, and antithrombotic substances that
Chronic Venous Insufficiency maintain the fuidity of blood and vessel patency (see Chap-
transport and distribution of immune cells to traumatized or
infected tissues. Disease states of the peripheral vasculature
interfere with these essential functions.

Peripheral vascular diseases result from processes that can
be grouped into three categories: (1) structural changes in the
vessel wall secondary to degenerative conditions, infection,
or infammation that lead to dilatation, aneurysm, dissec-
tion, or rupture; (2) narrowing of the vascular lumen caused
by atherosclerosis, thrombosis, or infammation; and (3)
‘spasm of vascular smooth muscle. These processes can occur

350
—____Dsseases ofthe Peripheral Vasculature 351
DISEASES OF THE AORTA

The aorta is the largest conductance vessel of the vascular system. In adults, its diameter is
approximately 3 cm at its origin at the base of the heart. The ascending aorta, 5 to 6 cm in
length, leads to the aortic arch, from which arise three major branches: the brachiocephalic
(which bifurcates into the right common carotid and subclavian arteries), the left common
carotid, and the left subclavian arteries. As the descending aorta continues beyond the arch,
‘its diameter narrows to approximately 2 to 2.5 cm in healthy adults. As the aorta pierces the
diaphragm, it becomes the abdominal aorta, providing arteries to the abdominal viscera
before bifurcating into the left and right common iliac arteries, which supply the pelvic organs
and lower extremities.

The aorta, like other arteries, is composed of three layers (see Fig. 5-1). At the luminal
surface, the intima is composed of endothelial cells overlying the internal elastic lamina. The
endothelial layer is a functional interface between the vasculature and circulating blood cells
and plasma. The media is composed of smooth muscle cells and a matrix that includes colla-
gen and elastic fibers. Collagen provides tensile strength that enables the vessels to withstand
high-pressure loads. Elastin is capable of stretching to 250% of its original length and confers
a distensible quality on vessels that allows them to recoil under pressure. The adventitia is
‘composed primarily of collagen fibers, perivascular nerves, and vasa vasorum, a rich vascular
network that supplies oxygenated blood to the aorta.

The aorta is subject to injury from mechanical trauma because it is continuously exposed
to high pulsatile pressure and shear stress. The predominance of elastin in the media
(2:1 over collagen) allows the aorta to expand during systole and recoil during diastole. The
recoil of the aorta against the closed aortic valve contributes to the distal propagation of blood
fow during the phase of left ventricular relaxation. With advancing age, the elastic compo-
nent of the aorta and its branches degenerates, and as collagen becomes more prominent, the
arteries stiffen. Systolic blood pressure (SBP), therefore, tends to rise with age because less
energy is dissipated into the aorta during left ventricular contraction.

Diseases of the aorta most commonly appear as one of three clinical conditions: aneurysm,
dissection, or obstruction.

Aortic Aneurysms
An aneurysm is an abnormal localized dilatation of an artery. In the aorta, aneurysms are dis-
tinguished from diffuse ectasia, which is a generalized yet lesser increase of the aortic diameter.
Ectasia develops in older patients as elastic fiber fragments, smooth muscle cells decrease in
number, and acid mucopolysaccharide ground substance accumulates within the vessel wall.

The term aneurysm is applied when the diameter of a portion of the aorta has increased
by at least 50% compared with normal. A true aneurysm represents a dilatation of all three
layers of the aorta, creating a large bulge of the vessel wall. True aneurysms are characterized
as either fusiform or saccular, depending on the extent of the vessel’s circumference within
the aneurysm. A fusiform aneurysm, the more common type, is characterized by symmetrical
dilation of the entire circumference of a segment of the aorta. A saccular aneurysm is a local-
ized outpouching involving only a portion of the circumference.

In contrast, a pseudoaneurysm (also termed false aneurysm) is a contained rupture of
the vessel wall that develops when blood leaks out of the vessel lumen through a hole in the
intimal and medial layers and is contained by a layer of adventitia or perivascular organized
thrombus. Pseudoaneurysms develop at sites of vessel injury caused by infection or trauma,
such as puncture of the vessel during surgery or percutaneous catheterization. They are very
unstable and are prone to rupture completely.

Aneurysms may be confined to the abdominal aorta (most common), the thoracic aorta, or
involve both locations. They may also appear in peripheral and cerebral arteries.
352 chapter 15
Etiology and Pathogenesis of True Aortic Aneurysms

The etiology of aortic aneurysm formation varies depending on the location of the lesion
(Table 15-1). Ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms typically are characterized by cystic medial
degeneration (also termed cystic medial necrosis), a condition of degeneration and fragmen-
tation of elastic fibers, with subsequent accumulation of collagenous and mucoid material
within the medial layer. Cystic medial degeneration occurs normally with aging but is also asso-
ciated with hypertension. Additionally, it develops in certain inherited disorders of connective
tissue that affect the structural integrity of the aortic wall, including Marfan syndrome,
Loeys—Dietz syndrome, the vascular form of Ehlers—Danlos syndrome (type IV), and familial
thoracic aortic aneurysms. Marfan syndrome is caused by missense mutations of the fibrillin-1
gene (FBN1), which impair formation of functional microfibrils in elastin. Abnormal fibrillin-1
also limits the binding and inactivation of transforming growth factor B (TGF-B), a signaling
molecule that regulates cellular proliferation and differentiation. Loeys—Dietz syndrome is an
autosomal dominant disorder caused by genetic mutations of TGF-B receptors. While thoracic
aortic aneurysms have been associated with both increased activity of TGF-B and mutations
of its receptors, the mechanism by which aberrant TGF-f signaling alters vascular integrity is
not yet known. Ehlers—Danlos type IV syndrome results from mutations encoding type III pro-
collagen. Familial thoracic aortic aneurysms are caused by mutations of the TGF-B receptor as
well as of genes encoding the smooth muscle—specific alpha-actin (ACTA2) and beta-myosin
heavy chain (MYH11), which are essential components of the contractile complex in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Cystic medial degeneration also characterizes the form of thoracic aortic
aneurysm often associated with bicuspid aortic valves.

Aneurysms of the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta are usually associated with
atherosclerosis and its risk factors, including smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemia, male
gender, and advanced age. However, it is unlikely that atherosclerosis alone is responsible for
such aneurysm development. Rather, other important pathophysiologic mechanisms include
a genetic predisposition, local vessel inf ammation, and an imbalance between synthesis and
degradation of extracellular matrix proteins. For example, specific proteases (e.g., elastase,
collagenase) and matrix metalloproteinases derived from infammatory cells and vascular
endothelial and smooth muscle cells may contribute to the breakdown of elastin and collagen.
Aneurysm formation is also associated with markers of inf ammation, including C-reactive
protein (CRP) and cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6). Levels of both CRP and IL-6 have
been shown to correlate with the size of aneurysms, and inf ammatory cells such as B and T
lymphocytes and macrophages are frequently found on histologic examination. Angiotensin
IL, via its effect on inf ammation and oxidative stress, has also been implicated in experimen-
tal models of abdominal aortic aneurysms.

1. Gystic medial degeneration (usually affects ascending thoracic aorta)
* Marfan syndrome
* Loeys—Dietz syndrome
° Fhlers—Danlos syndrome (type IV)
* Bicuspid aortic valve
° Familial
2. Atherosclerosis/ degenerative (usually affects descending thoracic and abdominal aorta)
3. Infections of arterial wall
4. Vasculitis
° Takayasu arteritis
* Gant cell arteritis
Oe
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 353

Infrequent causes of aortic aneurysms (Table 15-1) include weakness of the media from infec-

tions of the vessel wall by Salmonella species, staphylococci, streptococci, tuberculosis, syphilis,
or fungi. Inf ammatory diseases such as Takayasu arteritis or giant cell arteritis (both described
later in the chapter) may similarly weaken the vessel and result in aneurysm formation.
Most aneurysms are asymptomatic, though some patients, especially those with abdominal
aortic aneurysms, may be aware ofa pulsatile mass. Others present with symptoms related to
compression of neighboring structures by an expanding aneurysm. Thoracic aortic aneurysms
may compress the trachea or mainstem bronchus, resulting in cough, dyspnea, or pneumo-
nia. Compression of the esophagus can result in dysphagia, and involvement of the recur-
rent laryngeal nerve may lead to hoarseness. Aneurysms of the ascending aorta may dilate
the aortic ring, resulting in aortic regurgitation and symptoms of congestive heart failure.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms may cause abdominal or back pain or nonspecific gastrointes-
tinal symptoms.

Aortic aneurysms are often first suspected when dilatation of the vessel is observed on
chest or abdominal radiographs, particularly if the wall is calcified. Aneurysms of the abdom1-
nal aorta or of the large peripheral arteries may also be discovered by careful palpation dur-
ing physical examination. The diagnosis is confirmed by ultrasonography, contrast-enhanced
computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging (Fig. 15-1).

The most devastating consequence of an aortic aneurysm is rupture, which can be
fatal. An aneurysm may leak slowly or burst suddenly, resulting in profound blood loss

_Supy "
P Jf g Ras ee
! he as e, \
— a
Rt .. ith “y Ltt
‘ A = 4 x yi
* - . . . Qe ’
4 Sint hry Voxar 3D
HGURE15-1. Abdominal aortic aneurysm. Gmputed tomographic angiogram (CIA) of an abdominal aortic
aneurysm, indicated by the green arrow. (Courtesy of Frank Rybicki MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
354 (chapter 15
and hypotension. Thoracic aortic aneurysms may rupture into the pleural space, medi-
astinum, or bronchi. Abdominal aortic aneurysms may rupture into the retroperitoneal
space or abdominal cavity or erode into the intestines, resulting in massive gastrointestinal
bleeding.

Natural history studies have shown that the risk of rupture is related to the size of the
aneurysm, as predicted by the Laplace relationship (i.e., wall tension is proportional to the
product of pressure and radius). The mean rates of thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms
expansion are 0.1 and 0.4 cm/year, respectively. Thoracic aneurysms rupture at an annual
rate of 2% for aneurysms less than 5 cm in diameter, 3% for aneurysms 5 to 5.9 cm, and 7%
for aneurysms greater than 6 cm. Abdominal aneurysms less than 4 cm, 4 to 4.9 cm, and 5
to 5.9 cm have annual rates of rupture of 0.3%, 1.5%, and 6.5%, respectively. Abdominal
aneurysms greater than 6 cm have a markedly higher risk of rupture.

Treatment

Treatment of an aortic aneurysm is based on its size and the patient’s overall medical condi-
tion. Once an aneurysm is identifed, its dimensions should be closely monitored through
repeated imaging, typically every 6 to 12 months depending on size. In general, surgical
treatment is considered for ascending aortic aneurysms greater than 5.5 to 6.0 cm. Ascending
aortic aneurysms in patients with Marfan syndrome (in whom the risk of complications is
greater) should be considered for surgical repair if the diameter is greater than 5 cm. Surgical
repair is generally recommended for descending thoracic aortic aneurysms measuring 6.5 to
7.0 cm, for abdominal aortic aneurysms measuring 5.5 cm or more, and for smaller aneu-
rysms that enlarge at a rate greater than 1.0 cm/ year.

The mortality associated with elective surgical repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms
is 3% to 5%. Patients are maintained on cardiopulmonary bypass as the aneurysm is
resected and replaced with a prosthetic Dacron graft. Patients with aneurysms involving
multiple aortic segments have staged repairs, in which one segment is corrected at a time.
Some patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms may be candidates for minimally invasive
repair, in which a transluminally placed endovascular stent graft is positioned across the
aneurysm.

Surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms involves placement of a prosthetic graft.
The operative mortality for such procedures at high-volume institutions is 1% to 2%.
Percutaneous endovascular repair of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms with stent grafts
can be performed in selected patients with less acute morbidity, and long-term results are
similar to that of surgical repair.

Medical management, including risk-factor reduction (e.g., smoking cessation), is cur-
rently recommended for patients with small aneurysms. B-Blockers may reduce the expansion
rate of thoracic aortic aneurysms in patients with Marfan syndrome; it is not clear whether
they are effective for other causes or types of aneurysms. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists,
which also inhibit TGF-B, are undergoing clinical trials in Marfan syndrome.

Aortic Dissection

Aortic dissection is a life-threatening condition in which blood from the vessel lumen passes
through a tear in the intima into the medial layer and spreads along the artery. Other related
acute syndromes include aortic intramural hematoma, penetrating aortic ulcer, and aortic
rupture. Acute intramural hematoma is a variant of aortic dissection characterized by a hem-
orrhage in the wall of the aorta without evidence of an intimal tear. A penetrating athero-
sclerotic ulcer results from erosion of a plaque into the aortic wall. Aortic rupture may be a
complication of aortic dissection, intramural hematoma, penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer, or
result from trauma.
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 355
Etiology, Pathogenesis, and Cassif cation
Aortic dissection arises from a circumferential or transverse tear in the intimal layer of the vessel
wall that allows blood from the lumen, under the driving force of the systemic pressure, to enter
into the media and propagate along the plane of the muscle layer. Another potential origin of
aortic dissection is rupture of vasa vasorum with hemorrhage into the media, forming a hema-
toma in the arterial wall that subsequently tears through the intima and into the vessel’s lumen.
of the medial layer can predispose to aortic dissection. Such degeneration may arise from chronic
hypertension, aging, and/or cystic medial degeneration (which, as described earlier, is a feature
of certain hereditary connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome and Ehlers—Danlos
syndrome). In addition, traumatic insult to the aorta (e.g., blunt chest trauma or accidental ves-
sel damage during intra-arterial catheterization or cardiac surgery) can also initiate dissection.
Aortic dissection is most common in the sixth and seventh decades and occurs more fre-
quently in men. More than two thirds of patients have a history of hypertension. Dissection most
commonly involves the ascending thoracic aorta (65%) and descending thoracic aorta (20%),
while the aortic arch (10%) and abdominal aortic (5%) segments are less commonly affected.
Dissections are commonly classif ed into two categories (Stanford types A and B), depend-
ing on their location and extent (Fig. 15-2). In a type A dissection (proximal), the ascending
aorta and/or aortic arch is involved, regardless of the site of the primary tear. A type B dis-
descending thoracic and abdominal aorta. This distinction is important because treatment
strategies and prognoses are determined by location. Proximal aortic involvement tends to be
the support structures of the aortic valve, or the pericardial space. Approximately two thirds
of dissections are type A and one third are type B. Dissections may also be classif ed as acute
or chronic, with acute dissections presenting with symptoms of less than 2 weeks’ duration.
Cinical Presentation and Diagnosis
The most common symptom of aortic dissection is sudden, severe pain with a “tearing” or “rip-
B dissections). The pain travels as the dissection propagates along the aorta and can radiate any-
where in the thorax or abdomen. Painless dissection is possible but uncommon (6.4% of cases).
TYPEA TYPE B
!
l
l
l
I
l
I
|
l
|
|
l
|
l
l
I
I
I
FIGURE 15-2. Aortic dissection. Type A involves the
ascending aorta, whereas type B does not. (Reprinted
from Braverman AC Thompson R, Sanchez L Diseases of
the aorta. In: Bonow RQ Mann DL Zpes DP, et al., eds. !
Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular
Medicine. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Hsevier; 2012.)
356 Chapter 15
Rupture
Pericardial tamponade
Hemomediastinum
Hemothorax (usually left sided)
Occlusion of aortic branch vessels

Grotid (stroke)

Qronary (myocardial infarction)

Splanchnic (visceral infarction)

Renal (acute renal failure)

Iliac, brachiocephalic, subclavian (limb ischemia)
Distortion of aortic annulus

Aortic regurgitation
OOO

Other symptoms relate to the catastrophic complications that can occur at the time of
presentation or thereafter (Table 15-2) and include (1) rupture through the adventitia any-
where along the aorta (often into the left pleural space or pericardium); (2) occlusion of
major branches of the aorta by the propagating hematoma within the vessel wall, which
compresses the lumen and can result in myocardial infarction (coronary artery involvement),
stroke (carotid artery involvement), visceral ischemia, renal failure, or loss of pulse in an
extremity; and (3) extension into the aortic root, with disruption of the aortic valve support
apparatus causing aortic regurgitation.

Several important physical findings may be present. Hypertension is frequently detected,
either as an underlying cause of dissection, a result of the sympathetic nervous system
response to the severe pain, or because of diminished renal vascular f ow, with activation of
the renin—angiotensin system. If the dissection has occluded one of the subclavian arteries, a
difference in SBP between the arms is noted. Neurologic deficits may accompany dissection
into the carotid vessels. If a type A dissection results in aortic regurgitation, an early diastolic
‘murmur can be detected on auscultation. Leakage from a type A dissection into the pericar-
dial sac may produce signs of cardiac tamponade (see Chapter 14).

The diagnosis of aortic dissection must not be delayed, because catastrophic complications
or death may rapidly ensue. The confirmatory imaging techniques most useful in detect-
ing dissection include contrast-enhanced CT, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), MR
angiography, and contrast angiography. Each of these techniques has specific advantages
and disadvantages, and the decision of which to employ is often guided by a hospital’s local
expertise. In emergency situations, CT scanning or TEE can generally be obtained rapidly and
offer excellent sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis.

Treatment

The goal of acute treatment is to arrest progression of the dissecting channel. Suspicion of
acute aortic dissection warrants immediate medical therapy to reduce SBP (aiming for a sys-
tolic pressure of 100 to 120 mm Hg) and to decrease the force of left ventricular contraction
and thus minimize aortic wall shear stress. Useful pharmacologic agents in this regard include
B-blockers (to reduce the force of contraction and heart rate as well as to lower blood pres-
sure) and vasodilators such as sodium nitroprusside (to rapidly reduce blood pressure). In
proximal (type A) dissections, early surgical correction has been shown to improve outcomes
compared with medical therapy alone. Surgical therapy involves repairing the intimal tear,
suturing the edges of the false channel, and if necessary, inserting a synthetic aortic graft.
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 357

In contrast, patients with uncomplicated type B dissections are initially managed with
aggressive medical therapy alone; early surgical intervention does not further improve the
outcome in these patients. Surgery is indicated, however, if there is clinical evidence of propa-
gation of the dissection, compromise of major branches of the aorta, impending rupture, or
continued pain. Percutaneous catheter-based repair with endovascular stent grafts has been
used successfully in selected stable patients with type B dissections. The graft seals the entry
site of the dissection, resulting in thrombosis of the false lumen.

PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASES
Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is defined by the presence of a f ow-limiting lesion in an
artery that provides blood supply to the limbs. The major causes of such arterial stenosis or
occlusion are atherosclerosis, thromboembolism, and vasculitis. The clinical presentation of
these disorders results from decreased perfusion to the affected extremity.

Peripheral Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease

Etiology and Pathogenesis
The most common cause of PAD is atherosclerosis. It is a prevalent vascular disorder, affect-
ing approximately 4% of persons over the age of 40 and 15% to 20% of those over the age of
70. The pathology of atherosclerotic PAD is identical to that of coronary artery disease (CAD),
and the major coronary risk factors (e.g., cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia,
and hypertension) are also associated with PAD. Approximately 40% of patients with PAD
actually have clinically significant CAD. As a consequence of the systemic nature of athero-
sclerosis, patients with PAD have a twofold to fivefold increased risk of cardiovascular death
compared with patients who do not have this condition. Thus, detection of PAD is useful in
identifying patients at increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events.

The pathophysiology of atherosclerotic PAD is also similar to that of CAD. Ischemia of
the affected region occurs when the balance between oxygen supply and demand is upset;
exercise raises the demand for blood f ow in the limbs’ skeletal muscle, and a stenosed or
obstructed artery cannot provide an adequate supply. Rest improves symptoms as the balance
between oxygen supply and demand is restored.

Recall from Chapter 6 that the degree of blood f ow reduction relates closely to the extent
of vessel narrowing, the length of the stenosis, and blood viscosity. The Poiseuille equation
describes this relationship:

Q= DPpr*
ShL
in which Q= fow, AP= pressure drop across the stenosis, r= vessel radius, 7 = blood
viscosity, and L= length of stenosis. Thus, the degree of vessel narrowing by the stenosis
(i.e., the change in r) has the greatest impact on f ow. For example, if the radius is reduced by
one half, the fow will be reduced to 1/16th of its baseline. The equation also indicates that
for stenoses of the same length and radius, higher f ow rates correspond to greater pressure
drops across the stenoses. That is, as the f ow velocity increases across a stenotic vessel, the
blood turbulence results in a loss of kinetic energy. The result is a decline in perfusion pres-
sure distal to the stenosis.

During exercise, products of skeletal muscle metabolism (e.g., adenosine) act locally to
dilate arterioles. The resulting decrease in vascular resistance serves to increase blood f ow
to the active muscle (recall that fow = pressure/resistance). In turn, the increased f ow
stimulates healthy arterial endothelium to release vasodilating factors such as nitric oxide,
thereby increasing the radii of upstream conduit vessels. However, in PAD, obstructed arter-
ies cannot respond to the vasodilating stimuli, thereby limiting fow increases. In addition,
358 chapter 15
dysfunctional atherosclerotic endothelium does not pity ee y wee
release normal amounts of vasodilating substances (see = AR PS. .
Chapter 6). Thus, the physical properties of a stenosis 2 ee di wat
and the reduced vasodilator activity imposed by dis- ‘- Oh =
eased endothelium prevent adequate blood fow from at ~y e
reaching distal tissues and contribute to ischemia. Ys A
Hemodynamic changes alone cannot account for the \ ge vA ,
dramatic reductions in exercise capacity experienced ; a
by PAD patients; changes in muscle structure and func- \ f \ Y
tion are also seen. One such change is the denervation ys
and dropout of muscle fibers, which is thought to occur \ KH mY
as an adaptation to intermittent ischemia. The loss of f ; (
such fibers can explain the reduced muscle strength ’ '
and atrophy that occur in PAD patients. Even viable /
muscle fibers in affected limbs may show abnormalities ; —>> f
of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism. N
In summary, atherosclerotic lesions produce steno- SAN AS
ses in peripheral conduit vessels and limit blood f ow to ) é —
the affected extremity. Mechanisms normally in place j
to compensate for increased demand, such as endoge- p) — }
nous release of vasodilators during exercise and recruit- J r Hl
ment of microvessels, fail in the face of endothelial { 4
dysfunction and diminished fow velocity. Thus, states '
of increased oxygen demand are not met with adequate
supply, producing limb ischemia. Adaptations to isch- —»>
emia include changes in muscle fiber metabolism and
muscle fiber dropout. Together, these physical and bio-
chemical changes result in weak lower limbs that suffer US
ischemic discomfort during exercise. Severe peripheral
atherosclerosis may reduce limb blood f ow to such an
extent that it cannot satisfy resting metabolic require-
ments. This results in critical limb ischemia, which
may progress to tissue necrosis and gangrene that may
threaten viability of the extremity. \’ /
Cinical Presentation and Diagnosis | {
PAD may affect the aorta or the iliac, femoral, popli- i, |
teal, and tibioperoneal arteries (Fig. 15-3). Patients \
with PAD may therefore develop buttock, thigh, or calf \
discomfort precipitated by walking and relieved by rest. | HGURE15-3. An angiogram
This classic symptom of exertional limb fatigue and demonstrating peripheral artery
pain is known as claudication. In severe PAD, patients _‘isease. ‘There is occlusion of the left |
may experience pain at rest, usually affecting the feet femoral artery (blue arrow) and stenosis
. . . of the right popliteal artery (green
or toes. The chronically reduced blood f ow in this case arrow). Collateral vessels that circumvent
predisposes the extremity to ulceration, infection, and — areas of stenosis and occlusion are
skin necrosis (Fig. 15-4). Patients who smoke or have __ present (red arrows). (Courtesy of Mchael
diabetes mellitus are at high risk of these complications. L Steigner MD, Brigham and Women’s
The location of claudication corresponds to the dis- Hospital, Boston, MA.)
eased artery, with the femoral and popliteal arteries
being the most common sites (Table 15-3). The arteries of the upper extremities are less fre-
quently affected, but brachiocephalic or subclavian artery disease can cause arm claudication.
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 359
%
A B
FIGURE 15-4. Leg ulcers. A. Ulceration affecting the foot in a patient with diabetes and peripheral artery
disease. (Courtesy of Christian E Sampson MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.) B. Venous
insuff ciency ulcer near the medial malleolus of the right leg. Notice the venous stasis pigmentation of the
surrounding skin. (Gourtesy of Lauren R. Bayer PA, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)

Physical examination generally reveals loss of pulses distal to the stenotic segment. Bruits
(swishing sounds auscultated over a region of turbulent blood fow) may be audible in the
abdomen (because of stenoses within the mesenteric or renal arteries) or over iliac, femoral,
or subclavian arterial stenoses. In patients with chronic severe ischemia, the lack of blood
perfusion results in muscle atrophy, pallor, cyanotic discoloration, hair loss, and occasionally
gangrene and necrosis of the foot and digits.

Ischemic ulcers resulting from PAD often begin as small traumatic wounds in areas of
increased pressure or in regions prone to injury, such as the tips of the toes and the volar
surface of the foot (see Fig. 15-4A). These often painful ulcers fail to heal owing to the
inadequate blood supply. Diabetic patients with peripheral sensory neuropathies are particu-
larly susceptible to ulcers at sites of trauma or pressure from ill-fitting footwear. Ischemic
ulcers can be distinguished from venous insufficiency ulcers, which develop more proximally
and on the medial portion of the leg. Venous ulcers are also associated with reddish-brown
pigmentation and varicose veins (see Fig. 15-4B).

In the evaluation of PAD, it is helpful to measure the ratio of blood pressure in the ankles
to that in the arms (termed the ankle—brachial index [ABI]) using a blood pressure cuff and
a Doppler instrument to detect blood fow (Box 15-1). Other testing to assess peripheral

TABLE 15-3

Site Location of Gaudication Symptoms

Distal aorta or iliac arteries Buttocks, hips, thighs, or calves

Femoral or popliteal arteries Calves

Subclavian or axillary arteries Arms
eC eC
360 Chapter 15
ee

BOX 15-1 Measurement and Interpretation of the Ankle—Brachial

Index

The ABI is the ratio of the SBP measured at the ankle to that measured at the brachial artery. To

determine the ABI, the patient should lie supine for 10 minutes with the head and heels fully

supported. A Doppler ultrasound probe is used to detect f ow in the brachial, posterior tibial (PT),
and dorsalis pedis (DP) arteries. A blood pressure cuff is placed on each arm to measure the SBP

at the brachial arteries and on each of the lower calves, just above the malleoli, to measure the

SBP at the PT and DP arteries. Use the higher of the PT and DP values on each side as the ankle

pressure measurement. Finally, divide the ankle pressure measurement by the higher of the two

brachial artery pressure measurements to determine the ABI.
Anormal ABI is > 1.0. An index < 0.9 is diagnostic of PAD. Patients with PAD may be
asymptomatic or have symptoms of intermittent claudication or rest pain. An index < 0.5 is found

in patients with severe PAD and critical limb ischemia.

AY .
ye" 7 - «a - »

Ankle Pressure Measurement using a Doppler Probe at the Right Dorsalis Pedis Artery
perfusion includes limb segmental systolic pressure measurements (using pneumatic cuffs
placed along the extremity) and pulse volume recordings (1.e., graphical measurement of vol-
ume changes in segments of the extremity with each pulse). Duplex ultrasonography is a
commonly used noninvasive method to visualize and assess the extent of arterial steno-
ses and the corresponding reductions in blood fow. Other more advanced imaging studies
(e.g., MR angiography, CT angiography, or intra-arterial contrast angiography) are obtained
when revascularization procedures are planned.

Treatment
For patients with PAD, antiplatelet therapy and risk factor modification (including smok-
ing cessation, lipid lowering, and control of diabetes and hypertension) are important in
reducing the likelihood of coronary events. Platelet inhibitors, such as aspirin and clopido-
grel, reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with PAD. It has not been
established if antiplatelet agents reduce symptoms or prevent thrombotic complications of
PAD itself.

Specific treatment of PAD includes supportive care of the feet to prevent trauma or restric-
tion of blood f ow. Exercise, particularly walking, improves endurance in part by increasing
metabolic efficiency in the skeletal muscle of the legs. A formal exercise program is consid-
ered first-line therapy in the management of PAD.

Certain medical therapies are sometimes useful in the treatment of claudication. Cilostazol
is a selective phosphodiesterase inhibitor that increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 361
and has vasodilator and platelet-inhibiting properties; it has been shown to improve exer-
cise capacity in patients with PAD. Pentoxifylline is a drug purported to improve the deform-
ability of red and white blood cells and may improve claudication symptoms in some
patients. Conversely, most vasodilator drugs (see Chapter 17) are not helpful in relieving
claudication.

More effective medical therapies for PAD are on the horizon. Advances in angiogenesis
research and clinical trials provide hope that revascularization through delivery of angio-
genic growth factors (e.g., vascular endothelial growth factor and basic fibroblast growth
factor), and regenerative cell-based therapies, including use of endothelial progenitor cells,
may be possible.

Mechanical revascularization is indicated when medical therapy has failed for patients with
disabling claudication and as first-line therapy in cases of critical limb ischemia. In advanced
cases, therapy is directed at healing ischemic ulcerations and preventing limb loss. Catheter-
based interventions, such as percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stent implantation, can
be performed on selected patients with low morbidity. Surgical procedures include bypass opera-
tions to circumvent the occluded arteries using saphenous vein or prosthetic grafts. However,
amputation may be necessary if blood fow cannot be satisfactorily reestablished to maintain
limb viability.

Acute Arterial Occlusion

Acute arterial occlusion is caused either by embolization from a cardiac or proximal vascular
site or by thrombus formation in situ. The origin of arterial emboli is most often the heart,
usually resulting from disorders involving intracardiac stasis of fow (Table 15-4). Emboli
may also originate from thrombus or atheromatous material overlying a segment of the aorta.
Rarely, arterial emboli originate from the venous circulation. If a venous clot travels to the
right-heart chambers and is able to pass through an abnormal intracardiac communication
(e.g., an atrial septal defect), it then enters the systemic arterial circulation (a condition
known as a paradoxical embolism). Primary arterial thrombus formation may appear at sites
of endothelial damage or atherosclerotic stenoses, or within bypass grafts.

The extent of tissue damage from thromboembolism depends on the site of the occluded
artery, the duration of occlusion, and the degree of collateral circulation serving the tissue
beyond the obstruction. Common symptoms and signs that may develop from abrupt reduc-
tion in blood supply include pain, pallor, paralysis, paresthesia, and pulselessness (termed
the “five Ps”). A sixth P, poikilothermia (coolness), is also often manifest.

Patients with a proven acute arterial occlusion should be treated with a parenteral anti-
coagulant such as heparin (followed by oral warfarin) to prevent propagation of the clot

Cardiac origin

Stagnant left atrial f ow (e.g., atrial fibrillation, mitral stenosis)

Left ventricular mural thrombus (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction, ventricular

aneurysm)

Valvular lesions (endocarditis, thrombus on prosthetic valve)

Left atrial myxoma (mobile tumor in left atrium)

Aortic origin
Thrombus material overlying atherosclerotic segment
Venous origin

Paradoxical embolism travels through intracardiac shunt

OOOO
362 chapter 15
and to reduce the likelihood of additional embolic events. A revascularization procedure
(catheter-based thrombolysis or thrombectomy, surgical embolectomy, or bypass surgery) is
indicated if limb viability is at risk.

Atheroembolism is the condition of peripheral arterial occlusion by atheromatous mate-
rial (i.e., cholesterol, platelets, and fibrin) derived from more proximal vascular sites, such
as atherosclerotic lesions or aneurysms. The emboli lodge distally, resulting in occlusion of
small arteries in the muscle and skin. Patients typically present with acute pain and tender-
ness at the involved site. Occlusion of digital vessels may result in the “blue toe” syndrome,
culminating in gangrene and necrosis. Other findings may include livedo reticularis (purplish
mottling of involved skin), kidney failure (caused by renal atheroembolism), and intestinal
ischemia. Although an estimated 50% to 60% of cases are spontaneous, atheroembolism
may occur after intra-arterial procedures (e.g., cardiac catheterization) when atherosclerotic
material is unintentionally dislodged from the proximal vasculature. Ischemia resulting from
atheroemboli is difficult to manage because the heterogeneous composition and distribution
of emboli often precludes surgical removal or thrombolytic therapy. Surgical intervention to
remove or bypass the source of emboli may be necessary to prevent recurrences.

Vasculitic Syndromes
Vasculitis (vessel wall inf ammation) results from immune complex deposition or cell-mediated
immune reactions directed against the vessel wall. Immune complexes activate the comple-
ment cascade with subsequent release of chemoattractants and anaphylatoxins that direct
neutrophil migration to the vessel wall and increase vascular permeability. Neutrophils injure
the vessel by releasing lysosomal contents and producing toxic oxygen-derived free radicals. In
cell-mediated immune reactions, T lymphocytes bind to vascular antigens and release lympho-
kines that attract additional lymphocytes and macrophages to the vessel wall. These inf am-
matory processes can cause end-organ ischemia through vascular necrosis or local thrombosis.

The cause of most of the vasculitic syndromes is unknown, but they often can be distin-
guished from one another by the pattern of involved vessels and by histologic characteristics.
Three important examples of vasculitic syndromes are Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis,
and thromboangiitis obliterans.

Takayasu arteritis is a chronic vasculitis of unknown etiology that targets the aorta and its
major branches. The estimated annual incidence is 1.2 to 2.6 cases per million. Between 80%
and 90% of affected persons are women, with onset typically between the ages of 10 and 40.
Most reported cases have been from Asia and Africa, but it is a worldwide disease. Patients
typically present with systemic complaints such as malaise and fever; focal symptoms are
related to inf ammation of the affected vessel and include cerebrovascular ischemia (brachioce-
phalic or carotid artery involvement), myocardial ischemia (coronary artery), arm claudication
(brachiocephalic or subclavian artery), or hypertension (renal artery). The carotid and limb
pulses are diminished or absent in nearly 85% of patients at the time of diagnosis; hence, this
condition is often termed “pulseless” disease. Takayasu arteritis is also an uncommon cause
of aortic aneurysm or aortic dissection. Histologic examination of affected vessels reveals con-
tinuous or patchy granulomatous inf ammation with lymphocytes, histiocytes, and multinucle-
ated giant cells, resulting in intimal proliferation, disruption of the elastic lamina, and fibrosis.
Antiendothelial antibodies may also play a role in the disease. Steroid and cytotoxic drugs may
reduce vascular infammation and alleviate symptoms of Takayasu arteritis. Surgical bypass
of obstructed vessels may be helpful in severe cases. The 5-year survival rate is 80% to 90%.

Giant cell arteritis (also termed temporal arteritis) is a chronic vasculitis of medium-
sized to large arteries that most commonly involves the cranial vessels or the aortic arch and
its branches. It is an uncommon disease, with an incidence of 24 per 100,000, and the typical
onset is after age 50; 65% of patients are female. Giant cell arteritis may be associated with
the inf ammatory condition known as polymyalgia rheumatica. Histologic findings in affected
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 363
vessels include lymphocyte and macrophage infiltration, intimal fibrosis, and focal necrosis,
with granulomas containing multinucleated giant cells.

Symptoms and signs of giant cell arteritis depend on the distribution of affected arteries
and may include diminished temporal pulses, prominent headache (temporal artery involve-
ment), or facial pain and claudication of the jaw while chewing (facial artery involvement).
Ophthalmic artery arteritis leads to impaired vision, with permanent partial or complete loss
in 15% to 20% of patients. Serum markers of inf ammation (e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation
rate and CRP) are invariably elevated in patients with giant cell arteritis. Ultrasound exami-
nation can support the diagnosis by demonstrating a hypoechoic halo around the involved
arterial lumen with vessel stenosis and/or occlusion. The diagnosis can be confirmed by
biopsy of an involved vessel, usually a temporal artery, but treatment should not wait for
biopsy results. High-dose systemic steroids are effective in treating vasculitis and prevent-
ing visual complications. Giant cell arteritis usually has a self-limited course of | to 5 years.

Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease) is a segmental inf ammatory disease of
small and medium-sized arteries, veins, and nerves involving the distal vessels of the upper
and lower extremities. It is most prevalent in the Far and Middle East and has a very strong
association with cigarette smoking. It is most common in men younger than age 45; only 10%
to 25% of patients are female. There is an increased incidence of human leukocyte antigen A9
(HLA-A9) and HLA-BS in affected persons.

Thromboangiitis obliterans presents with a triad of symptoms and signs: distal arterial
occlusion, Raynaud phenomenon (described in the next section), and migrating superficial
vein thrombophlebitis. Arterial occlusion results in arm and foot claudication as well as isch-
emia of the digits. Traditional laboratory markers of inf ammation and autoimmune disease
are usually not detected. Arteriographic features of involved arteries include areas of stenosis
interspersed with normal-appearing vessels with more severe disease distally, collateral ves-
sels with a “corkscrew” appearance around the stenotic regions, and lack of atherosclerosis
in proximal arteries. The diagnosis can be established by tissue biopsy, although this is rarely
needed. Biopsy specimens of affected vessels reveal an occlusive, highly cellular, inf amma-
tory thrombus, with limited involvement of the vessel wall and preservation of the internal
elastic lamina (Fig. 15-5). The most important treatment for thromboangiitis obliterans is
smoking cessation, which usually prevents progression of the disease and its complications.
Debridement of necrotic tissue may be necessary in advanced cases. Revascularization is not
usually an option because of the distal location of the arterial lesions.

eal _A
(35 CBN Car
co wat Gow
CoG 4 |
Acute phase: Thrombus Subacute phase: Chronic phase:
including neutrophils @ Progressive organization of —_ Inflammation is no longer
and giant cells (ay the thrombus takes place. present and organized
occludes the vessel thrombus and vascular
lumen but spares the fibrosis <= remain.
wall.
Wy pPhate lets GS Erythrocyte
HGURE15-5. Pathophysiologic phases of thromboangiitis obliterans. (Reprinted from Piazza G Geager MA
Thromboangiitis obliterans. Grculation. 2010;121(16):1858—1861.)
364 Chapter IS
VASOSPASME RAYNAUD PHENOVIEENON
Raynaud phenomenon is a vasospastic disease
of the digital arteries that occurs in susceptible
people when exposed to cool temperatures or
sometimes during emotional stress. Vasospasm
is an extreme vasoconstrictor response that
temporarily obliterates the vascular lumen, —
inhibiting blood fow. Typically, such episodes an
are characterized by a triphasic color response.
First, the fingers and/or toes blanch to a distinct
white as blood f ow is interrupted (Fig. 15-6).
The second phase is characterized by cyanosis,
related to local accumulation of desaturated
hemoglobin, followed by a third phase of ruddy
color as blood f ow resumes. The color response |
may be accompanied by numbness, paresthe-
sias, or pain of the affected digits.

This condition may occur as an isolated dis-
order, termed primary Raynaud phenomenon
or Raynaud disease. Patients are predominantly HGURE15-6. Raynaud phenomenon. Blanching
women between the ages of 20 and 40. Primary _f the fourth digit (red arrow) is evident (phase 1
Raynaud phenomenon most often manifests the tricolor response).
in the fingers, but 40% of patients also have
involvement of the toes. The prognosis of primary Raynaud phenomenon is relatively benign,
with only a minority reporting a worsening of symptoms over time.

Secondary Raynaud phenomenon may appear as a component of other conditions. Common
causes include connective tissue diseases (e.g., scleroderma and systemic lupus erythema-
tosus) and arterial occlusive disorders. Other causes of secondary Raynaud phenomenon
include carpal tunnel syndrome, thoracic outlet syndrome, blood dyscrasias, certain drugs,
and thermal or vibration injury.

Even in healthy vessels, cold exposure normally produces a vasoconstrictor response.
Cooling stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, resulting in local discharge of norepi-
nephrine, which binds to vascular adrenergic receptors. In the fingers and toes, only vasocon-
stricting @ receptors are present; other regional circulations have both constrictor and dilator
adrenergic responses. Thus, a modest vasoconstriction of the digits results when healthy
people are exposed to cooling. In contrast, in Raynaud phenomenon, cold exposure induces
severe vasoconstriction.

A variety of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the vasospastic response to cold
and stress in patients with primary Raynaud phenomenon, including an exaggerated sympa-
thetic discharge in response to cold, heightened vascular sensitivity to adrenergic stimuli, or
excessive release of vasoconstrictor stimuli, such as serotonin, thromboxane, and endothe-
lin. In patients with secondary Raynaud phenomenon caused by connective tissue diseases
or arterial occlusive disease, the digital vascular lumen is largely obliterated by sclerosis or
inf ammation, resulting in lower intraluminal pressure and greater susceptibility to sympa-
thetically mediated vasoconstriction.

Treatment of Raynaud phenomenon involves avoiding cold environments, dressing
in warm clothes, and wearing insulated gloves or footwear. There has also been some
success in preventing vasospasm with pharmacologic agents that relax vascular tone,
including calcium channel blockers, a-adrenergic blockers, and phosphodiesterase type
5 inhibitors such as sildenafil (see Chapter 17), but such therapies are reserved for
severe cases.
—_____ Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature _ 365
VENOUS DISEASE

Veins are high-capacitance vessels that contain more than 70% of the total blood volume. In
contrast to the muscular structure of arteries, the subendothelial layer of veins is thin, and
the tunica media comprises fewer, smaller bundles of smooth muscle cells intermixed with
reticular and elastic f bers. While veins of the extremities possess intrinsic vasomotor activity,
transport of blood back to the heart relies greatly on external compression by the surrounding
skeletal muscles and on a series of one-way endothelial valves.

Veins of the extremities are classifed as either deep or superf cial. In the lower extremi-
ties, where most peripheral venous disorders occur, the deep veins generally course along
the arteries, whereas the superf cial veins are located subcutaneously. The superf cial vessels
drain into deeper veins through a series of perforating connectors, ultimately returning blood
to the heart.

Varicose Veins

Varicose veins (Fig. 15-7) are dilated, tortuous superf cial vessels that often develop in the
lower extremities. Clinically apparent varicose veins occur in 10% to 20% of the general pop-
ulation. They affect women two to three times more frequently than men, and roughly half
of patients have a family history of this condition. Varicosities can occur in any vein in the
body but are most common in the saphenous veins of the leg and their tributaries. They may
also develop in the anorectal area (hemorrhoids), in the lower esophageal veins (esophageal
varices), and in the spermatic cord (varicocele).

Varicosity is thought to result from intrinsic weakness of the vessel wall, from increased
intraluminal pressure, or from congenital defects in the structure and function of venous
valves. Varicose veins in the lower extremi-
ties are classif ed as either primary or sec-
ondary. Primary varicose veins originate in
the superf cial system, and factors that lead
to their development include pregnancy,
prolonged standing, and obesity. During
pregnancy or prolonged standing, the high
venous pressure within the legs contrib-
utes to varicosities when there is underly-
ing weakness of the vessel walls. In obese
patients, the adipose tissue surrounding
vessel walls offers less structural support
to veins than does lean mass. Secondary ’
varicose veins occur when an abnormality
in the deep venous system is the cause of
superf cial varicosities. These may develop
in the setting of deep venous insuff-
ciency or occlusion or when the perforat-
ing veins are incompetent. In such cases,
deep venous blood is shunted retrogradely
through perforating channels into superf -
cial veins, increasing intraluminal pressure
and volume and causing dilatation and var-
icosity formation.

Many people with varicose veins are  jq]GuURE 15-7. A patient with varicose veins of the
asymptomatic but seek treatment for cos- _ |eft leg (arrow). (Courtesy of Marie Gerhard-Herman
metic reasons. When symptoms do develop, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
366 Chapter 15
they include a dull ache, “heaviness,” or a pressure sensation in the legs after prolonged
standing. Superficial venous insufficiency may result when venous valves are unable to func-
tion normally in the dilated veins. This can cause swelling and skin ulceration that is particu-
larly severe near the ankle. Stasis of blood within varicose veins can promote superficial vein
thrombosis, and varicosities can also rupture, causing a localized hematoma.

Varicose veins are usually treated conservatively. Patients should elevate their legs while
supine, avoid prolonged standing, and wear external compression stockings that counter-
balance the increased venous hydrostatic pressure. Varicose veins that are symptomatic,
or associated with signs of venous insufficiency, may be treated with more advanced tech-
niques, including sclerotherapy, thermal ablation, or surgery. Sclerotherapy involves the
localized intravenous administration of an irritating chemical agent to fibrose varicose veins.
Endovenous thermal ablation procedures use laser or radiofrequency catheters to deliver heat
energy, which induces thromboses and is used to obliterate varicose great saphenous veins.
Surgical therapy involves direct vein ligation and removal.

Chronic Venous Insuff ciency
Chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) is characterized by elevated venous pressure with extrava-
sation of edema into the tissues of the lower extremities. CVI develops when venous blood
return to the heart is impaired by mechanisms that include valvular incompetence of deep or
superficial veins, venous obstruction, and calf muscle pump dysfunction. A secondary form
of CVI is postphlebitic syndrome, resulting from venous valvular damage or persistent venous
occlusion after deep vein thrombosis (described below).

Patients with CVI may experience pain or achiness in the legs, particularly when standing
for prolonged periods. Physical findings include varicose veins, edema, skin inf ammation
and hyperpigmentation, and ulcerations. Noninvasive testing with duplex ultrasound is use-
ful to detect the cause of CVI, such as venous obstruction. Compression stockings are the
mainstay of treatment. Associated venous ulcerations are treated with compression bandages
and absorbent dressings. Venous ablation techniques as described in the previous section are
used to treat varicose veins that contribute to CVI.

Venous Thromboembolism
The term venous thrombosis or thrombophlebitis is used to describe thrombus formation
within a superficial or deep vein and the infammatory response in the vessel wall that it
incites. Thrombi in the lower extremities are classified by location as either deep venous
thrombi or superficial venous thrombi.

Initially, the venous thrombus is composed principally of platelets and fibrin. Later, red
blood cells become interspersed within the fibrin, and the thrombus tends to propagate in
the direction of blood fow. The changes in the vessel wall can be minimal or can include
granulocyte infiltration, loss of endothelium, and edema. Thrombi may diminish or obstruct
vascular f ow, or they may dislodge and form thromboemboli.

Deep Venous Thrombosis

Fpidemiology, Hiology, and Pathophysiology
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) occurs most commonly in the veins of the calves but may also
develop initially in more proximal veins such as the popliteal, femoral, and iliac vessels. If
left untreated, 20% to 30% of DVTs that arise in the calves propagate to these proximal veins.
The two major consequences of DVT are pulmonary embolism (PE) (also termed venous
thromboembolism) and postphlebitic syndrome.
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 367
Stasis of blood f ow

Prolonged inactivity (following surgery, prolonged travel)

Immobilized extremity (following bone fracture)

Heart failure (with systemic venous congestion)

Hyperviscosity syndromes (e.g., polycythemia vera)

Hypercoagulable states
Inherited disorders of coagulation
Resistance to activated protein C(factor VLeiden)
Prothrombin gene mutation (PT @0210A)
Antithrombin def ciency
Def ciency of protein Cor protein S

Antiphospholipid antibodies/ lupus anticoagulant

Neoplastic disease (e.g., pancreatic, lung, stomach, or breast cancers)

Pregnancy and oral contraceptive use

Myeloproliferative diseases

Smoking
Vascular damage

Instrumentation (e.g., intravenous catheters)

Trauma
a

In 1856, Virchow described a triad of factors that predispose to venous thrombosis: (1)
stasis of blood f ow, (2) hypercoagulability, and (3) vascular damage. Stasis disrupts laminar
fow and brings platelets into contact with the endothelium. This allows coagulation factors
to accumulate and retards the inf ux of clotting inhibitors. Factors that slow venous f ow and
induce stasis include immobilization (e.g., prolonged bed rest after surgery or sitting in a car
or an airplane for a long trip), cardiac failure, and hyperviscosity syndromes (Table 15-5).

Various clinical disorders cause systemic hypercoagulability, including resistance of coagu-
lation factor V to activated protein C, a prothrombin gene mutation, and inherited deficiencies
of antithrombin, protein C, and protein S. Pancreatic, lung, stomach, breast, and genitouri-
nary tract adenocarcinomas are associated with a high prevalence of venous thrombosis. This
is thought to occur in part because necrotic tumor cells release thrombogenic factors. Other
conditions that contribute to hypercoagulability are listed in Table 15-5.

Vascular damage, either by external injury or by intravenous catheters, can denude the
endothelium and expose subendothelial collagen. Exposed collagen acts as a substrate for
the binding of von Willebrand factor and platelets and initiates the clotting cascade, leading
to clot formation. Less severe damage can cause endothelial dysfunction that contributes to
thrombosis by disrupting the production of vasodilating and antiplatelet substances (e.g.,
nitric oxide and prostacyclin, as explained in Chapter 6) and antithrombotic molecules such
as thrombomodulin and heparan sulfate (described in Chapter 7). Recent evidence indicates
that atherosclerotic risk factors, such as hyperlipidemia and diabetes, are also associated with
DVT formation.

The risk of venous thrombosis is particularly high after fractures of the spine, pelvis, and
bones of the lower extremities. The risk following bone fracture may be related to stasis of
blood f ow, increased coagulability, and possibly traumatic endothelial damage. In addition,
venous thrombosis may arise in patients following surgical procedures, particularly major
orthopedic operations.
368 Chapter 15

Women have a several-fold increase in the incidence of venous thrombus formation during
late pregnancy and the early postpartum period. In the third trimester, the fetus compresses
the inferior vena cava and can cause stasis of blood f ow, and high levels of circulating estro-
gen may induce a hypercoagulable state. Oral contraceptives and other pharmacologic estro-
gen products also predispose to thrombus formation.

Cinical Presentation
Patients with DVT may be asymptomatic, may describe calf or thigh discomfort when standing
or walking, or may report unilateral leg swelling. The physical signs of proximal DVT include
edema of the involved leg and occasionally localized warmth and erythema. Tenderness may
be present over the course of the phlebitic vein, and a deep venous cord (induration along the
thrombosed vessel) is occasionally palpable. Calf pain produced by dorsif exion of the foot
(the Homan sign) is a nonspecific and unreliable marker of DVT.

Diagnosis
The primary laboratory tests for the diagnosis of DVT include measurement of the serum
d-dimer level and venous compression ultrasonography. d-dimer, a by-product of fibrin degra-
dation that can be measured in a peripheral blood sample, is highly sensitive for the diagnosis
of DVT and/or acute PE. Because d-dimer may also be elevated in many other conditions
(such as cancer, inf ammation, infection, and necrosis), a positive test result is not specif c for
DVT. Thus, a normal d-dimer value helps exclude the presence of DVT, but an elevated level
does not definitively confirm the diagnosis.

Venous compression duplex ultrasonography is a readily available noninvasive technique
that is 95% sensitive for the diagnosis of symptomatic DVT in a proximal vein but only 75%
sensitive for diagnosing symptomatic calf vein thrombi. This technique uses real-time ultra-
sound scanning to image the vein and pulsed Doppler ultrasound to assess blood f ow within
it (Fig. 15-8). Criteria used for diagnosis of DVT with duplex ultrasonography include the
inability to compress the vein with direct pressure (suggesting the presence of an intraluminal
thrombus), direct visualization of the thrombus, and absence of blood f ow within the vessel.

Other diagnostic techniques are sometimes used. For example, MR venography can aid in
the diagnosis of proximal DVT, particularly pelvic vein thrombi, which are difficult to detect
by ultrasound. Contrast venography is now a rarely used invasive imaging technique that can
provide a definitive diagnosis. Radiocontrast material is injected into a foot vein, and images
are obtained as the contrast ascends through the venous system of the leg. DVT is diagnosed
by the presence of a filling defect (see Fig. 15-8).

Treatment

In patients with proximal DVT, elevation of the affected extremity above the level of the heart
helps reduce edema and tenderness, and anticoagulation prevents extension of the throm-
bus and PE. Initial anticoagulation typically consists of subcutaneous low molecular weight
heparin (LMWH). Intravenous unfractionated heparin is a cost-effective alternative that has
been used successfully for this purpose for many years, but LMWH is more convenient to
administer. Warfarin, an oral anticoagulant, is then prescribed for long-term management
and is continued for several months, depending on the underlying cause of DVT. Newer oral
anticoagulants, such as the factor Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban and apixaban (see Chapter 17),
allow a broader range of options for acute and long-term treatment of DVT. Catheter-based
thrombolysis may be useful for selected patients with iliofemoral deep vein thrombosis.

Treatment of patients with calf DVT (i.e., thrombus confined to below the knee) is more
controversial because pulmonary emboli from that site are uncommon. Some experts advocate
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 369
r > Ay i. 2 _—- «x - ae
2 em) -_— “. -- ~ ~ _ ri =4
§ a ee 4
a2 Les =... ' , - s ed ° =
| : —— i. $
| e ee F ~~ @ “Ss aH
: oc ae c Seline
ha — ag ne Pe =
7 ail _ ee, ee ~ my ~ a
'} _ — —— ae is ——_
. ae . i.
| m e.
= _— = — - = . ,
' — 7 ~
' —_
, 4 7 lies a
ae | Compression
FIGURE 15-8. Diagnostic imaging of deep venous thrombosis. A. Normal venogram. Contrast material
was injected into a foot vein and flls the leg veins in this radiograph. B. Venogram demonstrating extensive
thrombosis of the deep calf veins, popliteal vein, and femoral vein. Arrow indicates a f Iling defect in the
femoral vein due to the presence of thrombus. The deep calf veins are flled with thrombus and cannot be
visualized. C Ultrasound indicating deep venous thrombosis. The thrombus appears as an echogenic area
(arrow) within the femoral vein (V). A healthy vein would be easily compressible by the ultrasound transducer.
This vein, however, has the same diameter at baseline (top panel) and after compression (bottom panel),
confrming the presence of thrombus within it. Art, artery.
serial noninvasive monitoring to determine if the thrombus propagates into proximal veins,
whereas others treat such thrombosis with heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight)
followed by warfarin for 3 to 6 months.

Prophylaxis against DVT is appropriate in clinical situations in which the risk of develop-
ing the condition is high, such as during bed rest following surgery. Prophylactic measures
may include subcutaneous unfractionated heparin, LMWH, low-dose oral warfarin, or one of
the newer oral anticoagulants, as well as compression stockings, and/or intermittent external
pneumatic compression of the legs to prevent venous stasis.

Pulmonary Kmbolism

Epidemiology, Etiology, and Pathophysiology
PE supervenes when a clot, most often derived from DVT in a proximal vein of the lower extrem-
ities, dislodges and travels through the inferior vena cava and right heart chambers, f nally
reaching and obstructing a portion of the pulmonary vasculature. PE is common (incidence of
approximately 600,000 per year in the United States) and is often fatal, with an untreated mortal-
ity rate of 30% to 40%. In patients with PE, gas exchange is often impaired because of the asso-
ciated anatomic dead space and ventilation—perfusion mismatches that ensue in the lungs. As
370 chapter 15
a result, the alveolar—arterial oxygen gradient increases and hypoxemia may occur. Pulmonary
vascular resistance may rise as a consequence of the mechanical obstruction and because vaso-
active and bronchoconstrictive mediators released by platelets within emboli induce constriction
of the pulmonary vasculature and bronchospasm, respectively. The increased pulmonary vas-
cular resistance may lead to elevation of right ventricular (RV) wall stress, dilatation, and con-
tractile failure, compromising cardiac output. Recurrent and chronic PE can cause remodeling
of the pulmonary vasculature with pulmonary hypertension leading to right-sided heart failure.
Cinical Presentation
Patients with PE may experience dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain (due to pleural irritation),
hemoptysis, cough, or syncope (due to reduced cardiac output). Signs may include tachy-
pnea, bronchospasm, and evidence of elevated pulmonary artery pressure, including an
accentuated pulmonic component of the second heart sound and jugular venous distention.
Diagnosis
Many of the diagnostic tests used for DVT are also useful for PE. Additional tests are useful
in the evaluation of suspected PE. The most common electrocardiographic abnormality is
sinus tachycardia; there may be evidence of RV strain (e.g., inverted T waves in leads V,\-V,
or an “SI—Q3-T3” pattern: a prominent S wave in lead I, Q wave in lead III, inverted T wave
in lead III). RV strain may also produce elevated serum levels of cardiac-specifc troponins
or B-type natriuretic peptide (described in Chapters 7 and 9, respectively). Arterial blood
gas analysis may show decreased arterial oxygenation but is insensitive to the diagnosis of
PE. The preferred test to confrm the diagnosis is computed tomographic angiography (CTA;
Fig. 15-9). For patients who cannot tolerate CTA, such as those with renal insuff ciency or
hypersensitivity to radioiodinated contrast agents, radionuclide ventilation—perfusion (V/Q)
lung scanning may be obtained instead but is less precise for the diagnosis. Catheter-based
pulmonary angiography is rarely necessary for conf rmation.
Treatment
In patients with established PE, urgent anticoagulation is instituted to prevent recurrent embo-
lism. Anticoagulation measures are similar to those used for DVT. In patients with proximal
DVT or established PE who cannot be treated with anticoagulants (e.g., because of a bleeding
gr 2D Seb’
/ . RS ~
A j
- e
— —{ - — s Vy
XQ me ~~ » . FIGURE 15-9. CTangiogram displaying
J a massive pulmonary embolism. There is
, a large flling defect in the main pulmonary
_ Ae a> artery that extends into branches of both
i left and right pulmonary arteries (blue arrow).
, (Gourtesy of Andetta Hunsaker MD, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
Diseases of the Peripheral Vasculature 371
disorder), an intravascular filter can be percutaneously inserted into the inferior vena cava to
prevent emboli from reaching the lungs. Occasionally, systemic thrombolytic therapy or surgi-
cal pulmonary embolectomy is undertaken for patients with massive PE.

Superf cial Thrombophlebitis

Superficial thrombophlebitis is a benign disorder associated with inf ammation and thrombo-

sis of a superficial vein, just below the skin. It may occur, for example, as a complication of

an in-dwelling intravenous catheter. It is characterized by erythema, tenderness, and edema
over the involved vein. Treatment consists of local heat and rest of the involved extremity.

Aspirin or other anti-inf ammatory medications may relieve the associated discomfort. Unlike

DVT, superficial thrombophlebitis does not lead to PE.

° True aneurysms are caused by degenerative changes in the aortic wall; cystic medial degen-
eration is associated with ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms, and atherosclerosis is com-
monly found in descending thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms.

° A false aneurysm (pseudoaneurysm) represents a hole in the arterial intima and media con-
tained by a layer of adventitia or perivascular clot.

e Symptoms of aortic aneurysms relate to compression of adjacent structures (back pain,
dysphagia, respiratory symptoms) or blood leakage, with the most severe consequence being
aneurysm rupture.

e Aortic dissection results from a tear in the intima that allows blood to enter into the medial
layer, often in the setting of advanced age, hypertension, or cystic medial degeneration.

° Type A (proximal) aortic dissections involve the ascending aorta, are life threatening, and
require surgical repair.

° Type B dissections are confined to the descending aorta and are often managed by pharma-
cologic therapy alone.

e PAD is a common atherosclerotic disease of large and medium-sized arteries, often resulting
in claudication of the limbs.

e PAD is treated by risk factor modification, exercise, antiplatelet agents, and sometimes cilo-
stazol, a selective phosphodiesterase inhibitor.

e Arterial embolism arises from thrombus within the heart, from proximal arterial sites, or
paradoxically from the systemic veins in the presence of an intracardiac shunt (e.g., atrial
septal defect).

° Therapeutic options for acute arterial occlusion include anticoagulation, thrombolysis, and
surgical or endovascular interventions.

° Wasculitic syndromes are inf ammatory diseases of blood vessels that impair arterial f ow
and result in localized and systemic symptoms; such syndromes are distinguished from one
another by the pattern of vessel involvement and morphologic findings.

e Raynaud phenomenon is an episodic vasospasm of arteries that supply the digits of the
upper and lower extremities; it may be a primary condition (Raynaud disease) or may appear
in association with other disorders such as connective tissue diseases or blood dyscrasias.

° Naricose veins are dilated tortuous vessels that may present cosmetic problems; they may
cause discomfort, become thrombosed, or lead to venous insufficiency.

° Initial management of varicose veins is conservative, with periodic leg elevation and com-
pression stockings; severe symptomatic varicose veins can be treated with sclerotherapy,
radiofrequency or laser ablation, or surgical ligation and removal.

e CVI develops when venous pressure is increased and return of blood f ow is impaired by
venous valvular ref ux, resulting in chronic lower extremity edema, varicosities, and skin
ulceration.
372 Chapter 15

e Venous thrombosis results from stasis of blood f ow, hypercoagulability, and vascular
damage; the major complication is PE.

° d-dimer assay and venous compression ultrasonography are the primary tools used to diag-
nose DVT.

e Anticoagulation therapy with LMWH or unfractionated intravenous heparin (UFH), followed
by oral warfarin, is the usual treatment for DVT; newer targeted oral anticoagulant therapies
are also available.

e PEcan be confirmed by CT angiography or ventilation—perfusion scintigraphy.

e Anticoagulant agents (LMWH or UFH followed by warfarin or a newer oral anticoagulant)
constitute usual PE therapy; however, if anticoagulants are contraindicated, an inferior vena
cava filter is inserted to prevent recurrent PE.

Acknowledgments

Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Fan Liang, MD; Arash Mostaghimi, MD;

Mary Beth Gordon, MD; Geoffrey McDonough, MD; Michael Diminick, MD; Stuart Kaplan, MD;

and Jesse Salmeron, MD.

Additional Reading

Braverman AC. Acute aortic dissection: clinician update. diseases: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for
Circulation. 2010;122:184—188. Vascular Surgery and the American Venous Forum. J Vasc

Creager MA, Beckman JA, Loscalzo J, eds. Vascular Medicine: Surg. 2011;53:2S—48S.

A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease. Philadelphia, Goldhaber SZ, Bounzameaux H. Pulmonary embolism and
PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013. deep vein thrombosis. Lancet. 2012;379:1835—-1846.

Creager MA, Loscalzo J. Diseases of the aorta. In: Kasper D, Gornik HL, Creager MA. Aortitis. Circulation. 2008; 117:3039-3051.
Fauci A, Hauser S, et al., eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Hiratzka LF, et al. ACCF/ AHA 2010 guidelines for the diagnosis
Medicine. 19th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2015, and management of patients with thoracic aortic disease.
pp. 1637-1643. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:e27—e129.

Creager MA, Loscalzo J. Arterial diseases of the extremities. Patel MR, Conte MS, Cutlip DE, et al. State-of-the-art
In: Kasper D, Fauci A, Hauser S, et al., eds. Harrison’s review: Evaluation and treatment of patients with lower
Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New York, NY: extremity peripheral artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol.
McGraw-Hill; 2015, pp.1643-1650. 2015;65:931—941.

Gloviczki P, Comerota AJ, Dalsing MC, et al. The care of Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspid
patients with varicose veins and associated chronic venous aortic valve. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1920-1929.
y ie
Cngenital Heart Disease iv,
hee
. a 0
Zena L. Knight I t [
David W. Brown | ™
Chapter Outline Cree heart diseases are the most common form of
—————— birth defects and are the leading cause of death from birth
Normal Develop ment of the abnormalities in the first year of life. These conditions affect
Cardiovascular System : : : : _
Development of the Heart Tube approximately 8 of 1,000 live births, and an estimated 1 million
Formation of the Heart Loop people in the United States have congenital heart lesions.
Septation Some abnormalities are severe and require immediate medical
Development of the Cardiac attention, whereas many are less pronounced and have mini-
Valves mal clinical consequences. Although congenital heart defects
Fetal and dansifional are present at birth, milder defects may remain inapparent for
CGreulations ; ;
Fetal-Greulation weeks, months, or years and may even escape detection until
Transitional Grculation adulthood.
@mmon Ongenital Heart The past half-century has witnessed tremendous advances
Lesions in the understanding of the pathophysiology of congenital
Hsenmenger Syndrome / . . .
genetic mutations, environmental factors, maternal illness,
or ingestion of toxins during pregnancy can contribute to
cardiac malformations. However, specific etiologies remain
unknown in most cases.

The survival of children with congenital heart disease has
also improved dramatically in recent decades, largely because
of better diagnostic and interventional techniques. However,
the lifelong needs of affected patients include guidance

a regarding physical activity, pregnancy, and employment.
