Ischemic Heart Disease
Jayme Wilder
Marc S. Sabatine
Leonard S. Lilly
Chapter Outline [: 1772, the British physician William Heberden reported a
————————————— disorder in which patients developed an uncomfortable sen-
» Owen Si “ a sation in the chest when walking. Labeling it angina pectoris,
corey dial ‘Ogeen supply Heberden noted that this discomfort would disappear soon after
Myocardial Oxygen Demand the patient stood still but would recur with similar activities.
Pathophysiology of Ischemia Although he did not know the cause, it is likely that he was
Fixed Vessel Narrowing the first to describe the symptoms of ischemic heart disease,
Fndothelial Cell Dysfunction a condition of imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply
oer — of Myocardial and demand most often caused by atherosclerosis of the coro-
Consequences of Ischemia nary arteries. Ischemic heart disease now afficts millions of
Ischemic Syndromes Americans and is the leading cause of death in industrialized
Ginical Features of Chronic nations.
Stable Angina The clinical presentation of ischemic heart disease
History _ can be highly variable and forms a spectrum of syndromes
ce aination (Table 6-1). For example, ischemia may be accompanied by
es the same exertional symptoms described by Heberden. In
Treatment other cases, it may occur without any clinical manifesta-
Medical Treatment of an Acute tions at all, a condition termed silent ischemia. This chapter
Episode of Angina describes the causes and consequences of chronic ischemic
Medical Treatment Lo Prevent heart disease syndromes and provides a framework for the
ee diagnosis and treatment of affected patients.
Acute Cardiac Events Angina pectoris remains the most common manifestation
—_— of ischemic heart disease and literally means “strangling in
the chest.” Although other conditions may lead to similar
discomfort, angina refers specifically to the uncomfortable
sensation in the chest and neighboring structures that arises
from an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and
demand.
Ischemic Heart Disease 135
Syndrome Description
Ischemic heart disease Qndition in which imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and
demand results in myocardial hypoxia and accumulation of waste
metabolites, most often caused by atherosclerotic disease of the coro-
nary arteries (often termed coronary artery disease)
Angina pectoris Uncomfortable sensation in the chest and neighboring anatomic struc-
tures produced by myocardial ischemia
Stable angina chronic pattern of transient angina pectoris, precipitated by physical
activity or emotional upset, relieved by rest within a few minutes; epi-
sodes often associated with temporary depression of the ST segment,
but permanent myocardial damage does not result
Variant angina Typical anginal discomfort, usually at rest, which develops because of
coronary artery spasm rather than an increase of myocardial oxygen
demand; episodes often associated with transient shifts of the STseg-
ment, usually ST elevation (also termed Prinzmetal angina)
Silent ischemia Asymptomatic episodes of myocardial ischemia; can be detected by elec-
trocardiogram and other laboratory techniques
Unstable angina Pattern of increased frequency and duration of angina episodes produced
by less exertion or at rest; high frequency of progression to myocardial
infarction if untreated
Myocardial infarction Region of myocardial necrosis usually caused by prolonged cessation of
blood supply; most often results from acute thrombus at site of coro-
nary atherosclerotic stenosis; may be a frst clinical manifestation of
ischemic heart disease, or there may be a history of angina pectoris
a
DETERMINANTS OF MYOCARDIAL OXYGEN SUPPLY AND DEMAND
In the normal heart, the oxygen requirements of the myocardium are continuously matched
by the coronary arterial supply. Even during vigorous exercise, when the metabolic needs of
the heart increase, so does the delivery of oxygen to the myocardial cells so that the balance
is maintained. The following sections describe the key determinants of myocardial oxygen
supply and demand in a normal person (Fig. 6-1) and how they are altered by the presence of
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease (CAD).
Myocardial oxygen supply Myocardial oxygen demand
(P x r/2h)
Coronary blood flow
1) coronary perfusion pressure Heart rate
2) coronary vascular resistance
FIGURE 6-1. Major determinants a) external compression
of myocardial oxygen supply and b) intrinsic regulation Contractility
demand. P, ventricular pressure;
r, ventricular radius; h, ventricular
wall thickness.
136 chapter 6

Myocardial Oxygen Supply
The supply of oxygen to the myocardium depends on the oxygen content of the blood and
the rate of coronary blood f ow. The oxygen content is determined by the hemoglobin con-
centration and the degree of systemic oxygenation. In the absence of anemia or lung dis-
ease, oxygen content remains fairly constant. In contrast, coronary blood flow is much more
dynamic, and regulation of that flow is responsible for matching the oxygen supply with
metabolic requirements.

As in all blood vessels, coronary artery flow (Q) is directly proportional to the vessel’s per-
fusion pressure (P) and is inversely proportional to coronary vascular resistance (R). That is,

Qaa
R

However, unlike other arterial systems in which the greatest blood flow occurs during
systole, the predominance of coronary perfusion takes place during diastole. The reason for
this is that systolic flow is impaired by the compression of the small coronary branches as
they course through the contracting myocardium. Coronary flow is unimpaired in diastole
because the relaxed myocardium does not compress the coronary vasculature. Thus, in the
case of the coronaries, perfusion pressure can be approximated by the aortic diastolic pres-
sure. Conditions that decrease aortic diastolic pressure (such as hypotension or aortic valve
regurgitation) decrease coronary artery perfusion pressure and may lessen myocardial oxygen
supply.

Coronary vascular resistance is the other major determinant of coronary blood flow. In
the normal artery, this resistance is dynamically modulated by (1) forces that externally com-
press the coronary arteries and (2) factors that alter intrinsic coronary tone.

Extemal G@mpression
External compression is exerted on the coronary vessels during the cardiac cycle by con-
traction of the surrounding myocardium. The degree of compression is directly related to
intramyocardial pressure and is therefore greatest during systole, as described in the previous
section. Moreover, when the myocardium contracts, the subendocardium, adjacent to the high
intraventricular pressure, is subjected to greater force than are the outer muscle layers. This
is one reason that the subendocardium is the region most vulnerable to ischemic damage.

Intrinsic @ntrol of G@ronary Arterial Tone
Unlike most tissues, the heart cannot increase oxygen extraction on demand because in its
basal state, it removes nearly as much oxygen as possible from its blood supply. Thus, any
additional oxygen requirement must be met by an increase in blood f ow, and autoregulation
of coronary vascular resistance is the most important mediator of this process. Factors that
participate in the regulation of coronary vascular resistance include the accumulation of local
metabolites, endothelium-derived substances, and neural innervation.

Metabolic Factors
The accumulation of local metabolites signif cantly affects coronary vascular tone and acts
to modulate myocardial oxygen supply to meet changing metabolic demands. During states
of hypoxemia, aerobic metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria are
inhibited and generation of high-energy phosphates, including adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
is impaired. Consequently, adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate
(AMP) accumulate and are subsequently degraded to adenosine. Adenosine is a potent
Ischemic Heart Disease 137
vasodilator and is thought to be the prime metabolic mediator of vascular tone. By binding
to receptors on vascular smooth muscle, adenosine decreases calcium entry into cells, which
leads to relaxation, vasodilatation, and increased coronary blood flow. Other metabolites that
act locally as vasodilators include lactate, acetate, hydrogen ions, and carbon dioxide.

Endothelial Factors

Endothelial cells of the arterial wall produce numerous vasoactive substances that contrib-
ute to the regulation of vascular tone. Vasodilators produced by the endothelium include
nitric oxide (NO), prostacyclin, and endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF).
Endothelin 1 is an example of an endothelium-derived vasoconstrictor.

The discovery and signif cance of endothelium-derived NO are highlighted in Box 6-1.
In brief, NO regulates vascular tone by diffusing into and then relaxing neighboring arterial
a

BOX6-1 Endothelium-Derived Relaxing Factor, Nitric Oxide, and

the Nobel Prize

Normal arterial endothelial cells synthesize potent vasodilator substances that contribute to

the modulation of vascular tone. Among the frst of these to be identifed were prostacyclin (an

arachidonic acid metabolite) and a substance termed endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF).

EDRF was frst studied in the 1970s. In experimental preparations, it was shown that
acetylcholine (Ach) has two opposite actions on blood vessels. Its direct effect on vascular
smooth muscle cells is to cause vasoconstriction, but when an intact endothelial lining overlies
the smooth muscle cells, vasodilatation occurs instead. Subsequent experiments showed that ACh
causes the endothelial cells to release a chemical mediator (that was termed EDRF), which quickly
diffuses to the adjacent smooth muscle cells and results in their relaxation with subsequent
vasodilatation of the vessel.

Further research demonstrated that the mysterious EDRF is actually the nitric oxide (NO) radical.
Binding of ACh (or another endothelial-dependent vasodilator such as serotonin or histamine) to
endothelial cells catalyzes the formation of NO from the amino acid 1-arginine (see f gure). NOthen
diffuses to the adjacent vascular smooth muscle, where it activates guanylyl cyclase (G-cyclase).
G-cyclase in turn forms cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGVP), which results in smooth muscle
cell relaxation through mechanisms that involve a reduction in cytosolic G**.

AGONIST
(e.g., ACh, histamine, serotonin)
Nitric oxide i-Citruline
Endothelial Arsinj synthase
cell L-Arginine
O, Nitric oxide

Nitroprus side

or nitroglycerin
Smooth
muscle cell

(continues on page 138)
138 chapter 6
OOOO
BOX6-1 Endothelium-Derived Relaxing Factor, Nitric Oxide, and
the Nobel Prize (continued)

In contrast to the endothelial-dependent vasodilators, some agents cause smooth muscle
relaxation independent of the presence of endothelial cells. For example, the drugs sodium
nitroprusside and nitroglycerin result in vasodilatation by providing an exogenous source of NOto
vascular smooth muscle cells, thereby activating Gcyclase and forming cGVP without endothelial
cell participation.

In the cardiac catheterization laboratory, the intracoronary administration of ACh in a normal
person causes vasodilatation of the vessel, presumably through the release of NO However, in
conditions of endothelial dysfunction, such as atherosclerosis, intracoronary ACh administration
results in paradoxical vasoconstriction instead. This likely ref ects reduced production of NO by the
dysfunctional endothelial cells, resulting in unopposed direct vasoconstriction of the smooth muscle
by Ach. OF particular interest is that the loss of vasodilatory response to infused ACh is evident in
persons with certain cardiac risk factors (e.g., elevated LDL cholesterol, hypertension, cigarette
smoking) even before the physical appearance of atheromatous plaque. Thus, the impaired release of
NOmay be an early and sensitive predictor for the later development of atherosclerotic lesions.

The significance of these discoveries was highlighted in 1998, when the Nobel Prize in
medicine was awarded to the scientists who discovered the critical role of NOas a cardiovascular
signaling molecule.

smooth muscle by a cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)—dependent mechanism. The
production of NO by normal endothelium occurs in the basal state and is additionally stimu-
lated by many substances and conditions. For example, its release is augmented when the
endothelium is exposed to acetylcholine (ACh), thrombin, products of aggregating platelets
(e.g., serotonin and ADP), or even the shear stress of blood f ow. Although the direct effect of
many of these substances on vascular smooth muscle is to cause vasoconstriction, the induced
release of NO from the normal endothelium results in vasodilatation instead (Fig. 6-2).
Prostacyclin, an arachidonic acid metabolite, has vasodilator properties similar to those
of NO (see Fig. 6-2). It is released from endothelial cells in response to many stimuli, includ-
ing hypoxia, shear stress, ACh, and platelet products (e.g., serotonin). It causes relaxation of
vascular smooth muscle by a cyclic AMP—dependent mechanism.
EDHF also appears to have important vasodilatory properties. Like endothelial-derived
NO, it is a diffusible substance released by the endothelium that hyperpolarizes (and there-
fore relaxes) neighboring vascular smooth muscle cells. EDHF is released by some of the
Endo thelial-dependent Thrombin
vas odilato rs Angiotensin II
(ACh, serotonin, Epine phrj
thrombin, shear stress) Pine panne
HGURE 6-2. Endothelium-derived vasoactive
Endothelial substances and their regulators. Endothelium-
cell derived vasodilators are shown on the left and
Pe include nitric oxide (NO), prostacyclin, and
- | endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor
(EDHF). Endothelin 1 is an endothelium-derived
Smooth vasoconstrictor. In the normal state, the
mus cle vasodilator inf uence predominates over that of
cell vasoconstriction. ACh, acetylcholine; cGVP, cyclic
guanosine monophosphate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate.
Ischemic Heart Disease 139
same factors that stimulate NO, including ACh and normal pulsatile blood flow. In the coro-
nary circulation, EDHF appears to be more important in modulating relaxation in small
arterioles than in the large conduit arteries.

Endothelin 1 is a potent vasoconstrictor produced by endothelial cells that partially coun-
teracts the actions of the endothelial vasodilators. Its expression is stimulated by several
factors, including thrombin, angiotensin II, epinephrine, and the shear stress of blood flow.

Under normal circumstances, the healthy endothelium promotes vascular smooth muscle
relaxation (vasodilatation) through elaboration of substances such as NO and prostacyclin,
the influences of which predominate over the endothelial vasoconstrictors (see Fig. 6-2).
However, as described later in the chapter, dysfunctional endothelium (e.g., in atherosclerotic
vessels) secretes reduced amounts of vasodilators, causing the balance to shift toward vaso-
constriction instead.

Neural Factors
The neural control of vascular resistance has both sympathetic and parasympathetic compo-
nents. Under normal circumstances, the contribution of the parasympathetic nervous system
appears minor, but sympathetic receptors play an important role. Coronary vessels contain
both a-adrenergic and f,-adrenergic receptors. Stimulation of a-adrenergic receptors results in
vasoconstriction, whereas B,-receptors promote vasodilatation.

It is the interplay among the metabolic, endothelial, and neural regulating factors that
determines the net impact on coronary vascular tone. For example, catecholamine stimulation
of the heart may initially cause coronary vasoconstriction via the a-adrenergic receptor neu-
ral effect. However, catecholamine stimulation also increases myocardial oxygen consump-
tion through increased heart rate and contractility (f,-adrenergic effect), and the resulting
increased production of local metabolites induces net coronary dilatation instead.

Myocardial Oxygen Demand
The three major determinants of myocardial oxygen demand are (1) ventricular wall stress,
(2) heart rate, and (3) contractility (which is also termed the inotropic state). Additionally,
very small amounts of oxygen are consumed in providing energy for basal cardiac metabolism
and electrical depolarization.

Ventricular wall stress (o) is the tangential force acting on the myocardial f bers, tending
to pull them apart, and energy is expended in opposing that force. Wall stress is related to
intraventricular pressure (P), the radius of the ventricle (r), and ventricular wall thickness (h)
and is approximated by Laplace’s relationship:

P xr
6 =——_
2h

Thus, wall stress is directly proportional to systolic ventricular pressure. Circumstances
that increase pressure in the left ventricle, such as aortic stenosis or hypertension, augment
wall stress and myocardial oxygen consumption. Conditions that decrease ventricular pres-
sure, such as antihypertensive therapy, reduce myocardial oxygen consumption.

Because wall stress is also directly proportional to the radius of the left ventricle, condi-
tions that augment left ventricular (LV) f lling (e.g., mitral or aortic regurgitation) raise wall
stress and oxygen consumption. Conversely, any physiologic or pharmacologic maneuver that
decreases LV f lling and size (e.g., nitrate therapy) reduces wall stress and myocardial oxygen
consumption.

Finally, wall stress is inversely proportional to ventricular wall thickness because the force
is spread over a greater muscle mass. A hypertrophied heart has lower wall stress and oxygen
140 chapter 6
consumption per gram of tissue than a thinned-wall heart. Thus, when hypertrophy develops
in conditions of chronic pressure overload, such as aortic stenosis, it serves a compensatory
role in reducing oxygen consumption.

The second major determinant of myocardial oxygen demand is heart rate. If the heart rate
accelerates—during physical exertion, for example—the number of contractions and the amount
of ATP consumed per minute increases and oxygen requirements rise. Conversely, slowing the
heart rate (e.g., with a B-blocker drug) decreases ATP utilization and oxygen consumption.

The third major determinant of oxygen demand is myocardial contractility, a measure of
the force of contraction (see Chapter 9). Circulating catecholamines, or the administration
of positive inotropic drugs, directly increase the force of contraction, which augments oxy-
gen utilization. Conversely, negative inotropic effectors, such as B-adrenergic—blocking drugs,
decrease myocardial oxygen consumption.

In the normal state, autoregulatory mechanisms adjust coronary tone to match myocardial
oxygen supply with oxygen requirements. In the absence of obstructive coronary disease,
these mechanisms maintain a fairly constant rate of coronary flow, as long as the aortic per-
fusion pressure is approximately 60 mm Hg or greater. In the setting of advanced coronary
atherosclerosis, however, the fall in perfusion pressure distal to the arterial stenosis, along
with dysfunction of the endothelium of the involved segment, sets the stage for a mismatch
between the available blood supply and myocardial metabolic demands.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIA
The traditional view has been that myocardial ischemia in CAD results from f xed atheroscle-
rotic plaques that narrow the vessel’s lumen and limit myocardial blood supply. However,
research has demonstrated that the reduction of blood flow in this condition results from
the combination of fxed vessel narrowing and abnormal vascular tone, contributed to by
atherosclerosis-induced endothelial cell dysfunction.
Fixed Vessel Narrowing
The hemodynamic signif cance of f xed atherosclerotic coronary artery stenoses relates to
both the fluid mechanics and the anatomy of the vascular supply.
Huid Mechanics
Poiseuille’s law states that for flow through a vessel,
Q= APar*
8yL
in which Q is flow, AP is the pressure difference between the points being measured, r is the
vessel radius, n is the fluid viscosity, and Lis the vessel length. By analogy to Ohm’s law, flow
is also equal to the pressure difference divided by the resistance (R) to flow:
AP
Q=—
R
By combining these two formulas and rearranging, resistance to blood flow in a vessel can
be expressed as
8yL
p= sul
mr
Ischemic Heart Disease 141

Thus, vascular resistance is governed, 5x
in part, by the geometric component L/r’*.

That is, the hemodynamic signif cance of a Ax
stenotic lesion depends on its length and, Maximal coronary flow
far more importantly, on the degree of ves- 45
sel narrowing (i.e., the reduction of r) that
it causes.
2x
Resting coronary flow
Anatomy 1X peeeseeseeseeeceeneenenen, |
SS
The coronary arteries consist of large, *s)
proximal epicardial segments and smaller,
distal resistance vessels (arterioles). The 0 20 40 60 80 100
. . Lesion diameter (%)

proximal vessels are subject to overt ath-
erosclerosis that results in stenotic plaques. FIGURE6-3. Resting and maximal coronary blood
The distal vessels are usually free of flow-  f ows are affected by the magnitude of proximal
limiting plaques and can adjust their vaso- arterial stenosis (percent lesion diameter). The
motor tone in response to metabolic needs. dotted line indicates resting blood f ow, and the solid

; line represents maximal blood f ow (1.e., when there
These resistance vessels serve as a reserve, is full dilatation of the distal resistance vessels).
increasing their diameter with exertion to @mpromise of maximal blood f ow is evident when the
meet increasing oxygen demand and dilat- proximal stenosis reduces the coronary lumen diameter
ing, even at rest, if a proximal stenosis is by more than approximately 70%. Resting f ow may
suff ciently severe. be compromised if the stenosis exceeds approximately

The hemodynamic signif cance of a coro- 90% (Modified from Gould KL, Lipscomb K Effects
nary artery narrowing depends on both the of coronary stenoses on coronary f ow reserve and

; ; ; ; resistance. Am J Cardiol. 1974;34:50.)

degree of stenosis of the epicardial portion of

the vessel and the amount of compensatory

vasodilatation the distal resistance vessels are able to achieve (Fig. 6-3). If a stenosis narrows
the lumen diameter by less than 60%, the maximal potential blood flow through the artery is
not signif cantly altered and, in response to exertion, the resistance vessels can dilate to pro-
vide adequate blood flow. When a stenosis narrows the diameter by more than approximately
70%, resting blood flow is normal, but maximal blood flow is reduced even with full dilata-
tion of the resistance vessels. In this situation, when oxygen demand increases (e.g., from the
elevated heart rate and force of contraction during physical exertion), coronary flow reserve is
inadequate, oxygen demand exceeds supply, and myocardial ischemia results. If the stenosis
compromises the vessel lumen by more than approximately 90%, then even with maximal dila-
tation of the resistance vessels, blood flow may be inadequate to meet basal requirements and
ischemia can develop at rest.

Although collateral connections (see Chapter 1) may become apparent between unob-
structed coronaries and sites distal to atherosclerotic stenoses, and such flow can buffer the
fall in myocardial oxygen supply, it is often not suff cient to prevent ischemia during exertion
in critically narrowed vessels.

Endothelial Gl Dysfunction
In addition to fxed vessel narrowing, the other major contributor to reduced myocardial
oxygen supply in chronic CAD is endothelial dysfunction. Abnormal endothelial cell func-
tion can contribute to the pathophysiology of ischemia in two ways: (1) by inappropri-
ate vasoconstriction of coronary arteries and (2) through loss of normal antithrombotic
properties.
142 (chapter 6

Inappropniate Vasoconstriction
In normal persons, physical activity or mental stress results in measurable coronary
artery vasodilatation. This effect is thought to be regulated by activation of the sympa-
thetic nervous system, with increased blood fow and shear stress stimulating the release
of endothelial-derived vasodilators, such as NO. It is postulated that in typical people, the
relaxation effect of NO outweighs the direct a-adrenergic constrictor effect of catechol-
amines on arterial smooth muscle, such that vasodilatation results. However, in patients
with dysfunctional endothelium (e.g., atherosclerosis), an impaired release of endothelial
vasodilators leaves the direct catecholamine effect unopposed, such that relative vasocon-
striction occurs instead. The resultant decrease in coronary blood f ow contributes to isch-
emia. Even the vasodilatory effect of local metabolites (such as adenosine) is attenuated in
patients with dysfunctional endothelium, further uncoupling the regulation of vascular tone
from metabolic demands.

In patients with risk factors for CAD, such as hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and cigarette smoking, impaired endothelial-dependent vasodilatation is noted
even before visible atherosclerotic lesions have developed. This suggests that endothelial dys-
function occurs very early in the atherosclerotic process.

Inappropriate vasoconstriction also appears to be important in acute coronary syndromes,
such as unstable angina and myocardial infarction (MI). As described in Chapter 7, the usual
cause of acute coronary syndromes is disruption of atherosclerotic plaque, with superimposed
platelet aggregation and thrombus formation. Normally, the products of platelet aggregation
in a developing clot (e.g., serotonin and ADP) result in vasodilatation because they stimulate
the endothelial release of NO. However, with dysfunctional endothelium, the direct vaso-
constricting actions of platelet products predominate (Fig. 6-4), further compromising f ow
through the arterial lumen.

Loss of Normal Antithrombotic Properties
In addition to their vasodilatory actions, factors released from endothelial cells (including NO
and prostacyclin) also exert antithrombotic properties by interfering with platelet aggregation
(see Fig. 6-4). However, in states of endothelial cell dysfunction, release of these substances
is reduced; therefore, the antithrombotic effect is attenuated. Thus, in syndromes character-
ized by thrombosis (i.e., the acute coronary syndromes described in Chapter 7), the impaired
release of NO and prostacyclin allows platelets to aggregate and to secrete their potentially
harmful procoagulants and vasoconstrictors.

Other Gauses of Myocardial Ischemia
In addition to atherosclerotic CAD, other conditions may result in an imbalance between
myocardial oxygen supply and demand and result in ischemia. Other common causes
of decreased myocardial oxygen supply include (1) decreased perfusion pressure due
to hypotension (e.g., in a patient with hypovolemia or septic shock) and (2) a severely
decreased blood oxygen content (e.g., marked anemia, or impaired oxygenation of blood
by the lungs). For example, a patient with massive bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract
may develop myocardial ischemia and angina pectoris, even in the absence of atheroscle-
rotic coronary disease, because of reduced oxygen supply (i.e., the loss of hemoglobin
and hypotension).

On the other side of the balance, a profound increase in myocardial oxygen demand can
cause ischemia even in the absence of coronary atherosclerosis. This can occur, for example,
with rapid tachycardias, acute hypertension, or severe aortic stenosis.
Ischemic Heart Disease 143
Aggregating
° “Oh “@ platelets:
Ce ADP 5-HT TXA,
cell
Smooth
muscle
cell
A
HIiGURE 6-4. ‘The interaction between platelets
and endothelial cells. A. Normal endothelium.
Aggregating platelets release thromboxane (TXA))
and serotonin (5-HT), the direct vascular effects
of which cause contraction of vascular smooth Aggre gating
muscle and vasoconstriction. However, platelet © © ~otr ™ © platelets:
products (e.g., ADP and 5-HI) also stimulate the @ @ ADP 5-HT TXA,
endothelial release of the potent vasodilators
nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin, such that the T—Ci«’ © DL
net effect is smooth muscle relaxation instead.
Endothelial production of NO and prostacyclin Dysfunctional | Prostacyclin JNO
also serves antithrombotic roles, which limit endothelium roa 0
further platelet aggregation. ADP, adenosine | a
diphosphate. B. Dysfunctional endothelium
demonstrates impaired release of the vasodilator
substances, such that net smooth muscle Smooth C Contraction
contraction and vasoconstriction supervene. cell
The reduced endothelial release of NO and
prostacyclin diminishes their antiplatelet effect,
such that thrombosis proceeds unchecked. B
CONSEQUENCES OF TSCHEMIA
The consequences of ischemia refect the inadequate myocardial oxygenation and local
accumulation of metabolic waste products. For example, during ischemia, myocytes convert
from aerobic to anaerobic metabolic pathways. The reduced generation of ATP impairs the
interaction of the contractile proteins and results in a transient reduction of both ventricu-
lar systolic contraction and diastolic relaxation, as each are energy-dependent processes.
The consequent elevation of LV diastolic pressure is transmitted (via the left atrium and
pulmonary veins) to the pulmonary capillaries and can precipitate pulmonary congestion
and the symptom of dyspnea (shortness of breath). In addition, metabolic products such
as lactate, serotonin, and adenosine accumulate locally. It is suspected that one or more of
these compounds activate peripheral pain receptors in the C7 through T4 distribution and
may be the mechanism by which the discomfort of angina is produced. The accumulation of
local metabolites and transient abnormalities of myocyte ion transport may also precipitate
arrhythmias (see Chapter 11).

The ultimate fate of myocardium subjected to ischemia depends on the severity and duration
of the imbalance between oxygen supply and demand. It was previously thought that ischemic
cardiac injury results in either irreversible myocardial necrosis (i.e., MI) or rapid and full recovery
of myocyte function (e.g., after a brief episode of typical angina). It is now known that in addition
144 chapter 6
to those outcomes, ischemic insults can sometimes result in a period of prolonged contractile
dysfunction without myocyte necrosis, and recovery of normal function may ultimately follow.

For example, stunned myocardium refers to tissue that, after suffering an episode of
severe acute, transient ischemia (but not necrosis), demonstrates prolonged systolic dysfunc-
tion even after the return of normal myocardial blood f ow. In this setting, the functional,
biochemical, and structural abnormalities following ischemia are reversible and contractile
function gradually recovers. The mechanism responsible for this delayed recovery of function
involves myocyte calcium overload and the accumulation of oxygen-derived free radicals dur-
ing ischemia. In general, the magnitude of stunning is proportional to the degree of the pre-
ceding ischemia, and this state is likely the pathophysiologic response to an ischemic insult
that just falls short of causing irreversible necrosis.

In contrast, hibernating myocardium refers to tissue that manifests chronic ventricular
contractile dysfunction due to a persistently reduced blood supply, usually because of mul-
tivessel CAD. In this situation, irreversible damage has not occurred and ventricular func-
tion can promptly improve if appropriate blood f ow is restored by percutaneous or surgical
revascularization. Special “viability” imaging studies (e.g., positron emission tomography or
dobutamine echocardiography, as described in Chapter 3) of patients with CAD and contrac-
tile dysfunction can differentiate hibernating from infarcted myocardium. That distinction
can help guide the decision of whether to undertake coronary revascularization, because
hibernating myocardium would be expected to regain contractile function with restoration of
blood f ow, whereas infarcted myocardium would not.

Ischemic Syndromes
Depending on the underlying pathophysiologic process and the timing and severity of a myocardial
ischemic insult, a spectrum of distinct clinical syndromes may result, as illustrated in Figure 6-5.
— endothelial
A. Normal CJ" ¢ Patent lumen
j ( ¢ Normal endothe lial function
* Platelet aggre gation inhibited
N\A
plaque
B. Stable FIGURE 6-5. Pathophysiologic
angina = * Lumen narrowed by plaque f ndings in anginal syndromes.
° Inappropriate vasoconstriction :
A. Normal coronary arteries are
widely patent, and the endothelium
functions normally. B In stable
angina, atherosclerotic plaque and
inappropriate vasoconstriction
platelets (caused by dysfunctional
C. Unstable ;
angina thrombus * Plaque rupture — endothelium) reduce the vessel
* Platelet aggregation lumen’s size and coronary blood
*Thrombus formation = fow. C In unstable angina,
(wy ¢ Unopposed vasoconstriction disruption of the plaque triggers
platelet aggregation, thrombus
formation, and vasoconstriction,
all of which contribute to reduced
D. Variant coronary blood supply. D. In variant
angina * No overt plaques angina, atherosclerotic plaques are
ae * Intense vasospasm absent; rather, ischemia is due to
intense vasospasm that reduces
myocardial oxygen supply.
Ischemic Heart Disease 145
Stable Angina

Chronic stable angina manifests as a pattern of predictable, transient chest discomfort during
exertion or emotional stress. It is generally caused by f xed, obstructive atheromatous plaque
in One or more coronary arteries (see Fig. 6-5B). The pattern of symptoms is usually related
to the degree of stenosis. As described in the earlier section on pathophysiology, when athero-
sclerotic stenoses narrow a coronary artery lumen diameter by more than approximately 70%,
the reduced flow capacity may be suff cient to serve the low cardiac oxygen needs at rest but
is insuff cient to compensate for any signif cant increase in oxygen demand (see Fig. 6-3).
During physical exertion, for example, activation of the sympathetic nervous system results
in increased heart rate, blood pressure, and contractility, all of which augment myocardial
oxygen consumption. During the period that oxygen demand exceeds available supply, myo-
cardial ischemia results, often accompanied by the chest discomfort of angina pectoris. The
ischemia and symptoms persist until the increased demand is alleviated and oxygen balance
is restored.

Potentially contributing to the inadequate oxygen supply in stable angina is inappropriate
coronary vasoconstriction caused, at least in part, by atherosclerosis-associated endothelial
dysfunction. Recall that normally, the high myocardial oxygen demand during exertion is
balanced by an increased supply of blood as the accumulation of local metabolites induces
vasodilatation. With endothelial cell dysfunction, however, vasodilatation is impaired and the
vessels may paradoxically vasoconstrict instead, in response to exercise-induced catechol-
amine stimulation of a-adrenergic receptors on the coronary artery smooth muscle cells.

As a result, the extent of coronary artery narrowing in patients with atherosclerosis is not
necessarily constant. Rather, it can vary froom moment to moment because of changes in the
superimposed coronary vascular tone. For some patients with stable angina, alterations in
tone play a minimal role in the decreased myocardial oxygen supply, and the level of physical
activity required to precipitate angina is fairly constant. These patients have f xed-threshold
angina. In other cases, the degree of dynamic obstruction caused by vasoconstriction or vaso-
spasm plays a more prominent role, and such patients may have variable-threshold angina.
For example, on a given day, a patient with variable-threshold angina can exert herself or
himself without chest discomfort, but on another day, the same degree of myocardial oxygen
demand does produce symptoms. The difference reflects alterations in vascular tone over the
sites of f xed stenosis. Other clinical features of chronic stable angina are described in greater
detail later in the chapter.

Unstable Angina
A patient with chronic stable angina may experience a sudden increase in the tempo and
duration of ischemic episodes, occurring with lesser degrees of exertion and even at rest. This
acceleration of symptoms is known as unstable angina, which can be a precursor to an acute
MI. Unstable angina and acute MI are also known as acute coronary syndromes and result
from specif c pathophysiologic mechanisms, most commonly rupture of an unstable athero-
sclerotic plaque with subsequent platelet aggregation and thrombosis (see Fig. 6-5C). These
syndromes are described in detail in Chapter 7.

Variant Angina
A small minority of patients manifest episodes of focal coronary artery spasm in the absence
of overt atherosclerotic lesions, and this syndrome is known as variant angina or Prinzmetal
angina. In this case, intense vasospasm alone reduces coronary oxygen supply and results
in angina (see Fig. 6-5D). The mechanism by which such profound spasm develops is not
completely understood but may involve increased sympathetic activity in combination with
146 Chapter 6
endothelial dysfunction. It is thought that many patients with variant angina may actually
have early atherosclerosis manifested only by a dysfunctional endothelium, because the
response to endothelium-dependent vasodilators (e.g., ACh and serotonin) is often abnormal.

Variant angina often occurs at rest because ischemia in this case results from transient reduc-

tion of the coronary oxygen supply rather than an increase in myocardial oxygen demand.

Silent Ischemia
Episodes of cardiac ischemia sometimes occur in the absence of perceptible discomfort or pain,
and such instances are referred to as silent ischemia. These asymptomatic episodes can occur
in patients who on other occasions experience typical symptomatic angina. Conversely, in some
patients, silent ischemia may be the only manifestation of CAD. It may be diff cult to diagnose
silent ischemia on clinical grounds, but its presence can be detected by laboratory techniques
such as continuous ambulatory electrocardiography or it can be elicited by exercise stress test-
ing, as described later in the chapter. One study estimated that silent ischemic episodes occur in
40% of patients with stable symptomatic angina and in 2.5% to 10% of asymptomatic middle-
aged men. When considering the importance of anginal discomfort as a physiologic warning
signal, the asymptomatic nature of silent ischemia becomes all the more concerning.

The reason why some episodes of ischemia are silent whereas others are symptomatic has

not been elucidated. The degree of ischemia cannot fully explain the disparity, because even
MI may present without symptoms in some patients. Silent ischemia has been reported to be
more common among diabetic patients (possibly due to impaired pain sensation from periph-
eral neuropathy), the elderly, and in women.

Syndrome X
The term syndrome X refers to patients with typical symptoms of angina pectoris who have
no evidence of signif cant atherosclerotic coronary stenoses on coronary angiograms. Some
of these patients may show def nite laboratory signs of ischemia during exercise testing. The
pathogenesis of ischemia in this situation may be related to inadequate vasodilator reserve of
the coronary resistance vessels. It is thought that the resistance vessels (which are too small
to be visualized by coronary angiography) may not dilate appropriately during periods of
increased myocardial oxygen demand. Microvascular dysfunction, vasospasm, and hypersen-
sitive pain perception may each contribute to this syndrome. Patients with syndrome X have
a better prognosis than those with overt atherosclerotic disease.

CLINICAL FEATURES OF CHRONIC STABLE ANGINA

History
The most important part of the clinical evaluation of ischemic heart disease is the history
described by the patient. Because chest pain is such a common complaint, it is important
to focus on the characteristics that help distinguish myocardial ischemia from other causes
of discomfort. From a diagnostic standpoint, it would be ideal to interview and examine a
patient during an actual episode of angina, but most people are asymptomatic during routine
clinic examinations. Therefore, a careful history probing several features of the discomfort
should be elicited.

Quality
Angina is most often described as a “pressure,” “discomfort,” “tightness,” “burning,” or
“heaviness” in the chest. It is rare that the sensation is actually described as a “pain,”
and often a patient will correct the physician who refers to the anginal symptom as such.
Ischemic Heart Disease 147
Sometimes, a patient likens the sensation to “an elephant sitting on my chest.” Anginal dis-
comfort is neither sharp nor stabbing, and it does not vary signif cantly with inspiration or
movement of the chest wall. It is a steady discomfort that lasts a few minutes, yet rarely more
than 5 to 10 minutes. It always lasts more than a few seconds, and this helps to differentiate
it from sharper and briefer musculoskeletal pains.

While describing angina, the patient may place a clenched fst over his or her sternum,
referred to as the Levine sign, as if def ning the constricting discomfort by that tight grip.

Location
Anginal discomfort is usually diffuse rather than localized to a single point. It is most often
located in the retrosternal area or in the left precordium but may occur anywhere in the chest,
back, arms, neck, lower face, or upper abdomen. It often radiates to the shoulders and inner
aspect of the arms, especially on the left side.

Accompanying Symptoms
During the discomfort of an acute anginal attack, generalized sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic stimulation may result in tachycardia, diaphoresis, and nausea. Ischemia also results in
transient dysfunction of LV systolic contraction and diastolic relaxation. The resultant eleva-
tion of LV diastolic pressure is transmitted to the pulmonary vasculature and often causes
dyspnea during the episode. Transient fatigue and weakness are also common, particularly in
elderly patients. When such symptoms occur as a consequence of myocardial ischemia but
are unaccompanied by typical chest discomfort, they are referred to as “anginal equivalents.”

Precipitants
Angina, when not caused by pure vasospasm, is precipitated by conditions that increase myo-
cardial oxygen demand (e.g., increased heart rate, contractility, or wall stress). These include
physical exertion, anger, and other emotional excitement. Additional factors that increase myo-
cardial oxygen demand and can precipitate anginal discomfort in patients with CAD include
a large meal or cold weather. The latter induces peripheral vasoconstriction, which in turn
augments myocardial wall stress as the left ventricle contracts against the increased resistance.

Angina is generally relieved within minutes after the cessation of the activity that pre-
cipitated it and even more quickly (within 3 to 5 minutes) by sublingual nitroglycerin. This
response can help differentiate myocardial ischemia from many of the other conditions that
produce chest discomfort.

Patients who experience angina primarily due to increased coronary artery tone or vaso-
spasm often develop symptoms at rest, independent of activities that increase myocardial
oxygen demand.

Frequency
Although the level of exertion necessary to precipitate angina may remain fairly constant,
the frequency of episodes varies considerably because patients quickly learn which activities
cause their discomfort and avoid them. It is thus important to inquire about reductions in
activities of daily living when taking the history.

Risk Factors
In addition to the description of chest discomfort, a careful history should uncover risk fac-
tors that predispose to atherosclerosis and CAD, including cigarette smoking, dyslipidemia,
hypertension, diabetes, and a family history of premature coronary disease (see Chapter 5).
148 chapter 6
Differential Diagnosis
Several conditions can give rise to symptoms that mimic the transient chest discomfort of
angina pectoris, including other cardiac causes (e.g., pericarditis), gastrointestinal disor-
ders (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, peptic ulcer disease, esophageal spasm, or biliary pain),
and musculoskeletal conditions (including chest wall pain, spinal osteoarthritis, and cer-
vical radiculitis). The history remains of paramount importance in distinguishing myocar-
dial ischemia from these disorders. In contrast to angina pectoris, gastrointestinal causes of
recurrent chest pain are often precipitated by certain foods and are unrelated to exertion.
Musculoskeletal causes of chest discomfort tend to be more superf cial or can be localized
to a discrete spot (i.e., the patient can point to the pain with one fnger) and often vary
with changes in position. Similarly, the presence of pleuritic pain (sharp pain aggravated by
respiratory movements) argues against angina as the cause; this symptom is more likely a
result of pericarditis, or an acute pulmonary condition such as pulmonary embolism or acute
pneumothorax. Useful differentiating features of recurrent chest pain are listed in Table 6-2.
Qndition Differentiating Features
Cardiac
Myocardial ischemia * Retrosternal tightness or pressure; typically radiates to the neck, jaw,
or left shoulder and arm
° Lasts a few minutes (usually <10)
* Brought on by exertion, relieved by rest or nitroglycerin
° KG transient ST depressions or elevations, or fattened or inverted
T waves
Pericarditis * Sharp, pleuritic pain that varies with position; friction rub may be
present on auscultation
* Gan last for hours to days
° EGG diffuse ST elevations and PR deviation (see Chapter 14)
Qstrointestinal
Castroesophageal ref ux * Retrosternal burning
* Precipitated by certain foods, worsened by supine position, unaf-
fected by exertion
° Relieved by antacids
Peptic ulcer disease ° Fpigastric ache or burning
* Occurs after meals, unaffected by exertion
° Relieved by antacids, not by nitroglycerin
Esophageal spasm * Retrosternal pain accompanied by dysphagia
* Precipitated by meals, unaffected by exertion
* My be relieved by nitroglycerin
Biliary colic * @nstant, deep pain in right upper quadrant; can last for hours
* Brought on by fatty foods, unaffected by exertion
* Not relieved by antacids or nitroglycerin
Musculoskeletal
@stochondral syndrome * Sternal pain worsened by chest movement
* @stochondral junctions tender to palpation
* Relieved by anti-inf ammatory drugs, not by nitroglycerin
Cervical radiculitis * @nstant ache or shooting pains, may be in a dermatomal distribution
* Worsened by neck motion
a
HG electrocardiogram.
Ischemic Heart Disease 149
Physical Examination

If it is possible to examine a patient during an anginal attack, several transient physical signs
may be detected (Fig. 6-6). An increased heart rate and blood pressure are common because
of the augmented sympathetic response. Myocardial ischemia may lead to papillary muscle
dysfunction and therefore mitral regurgitation. Ischemia-induced regional ventricular contrac-
tile abnormalities can sometimes be detected as an abnormal bulging impulse on palpation
of the left chest. Ischemia decreases ventricular compliance, producing a stiffened ventricle
and therefore an S, gallop on physical examination during atrial contraction (see Chapter 2).
However, if the patient is free of chest discomfort during the examination, there may be no
abnormal cardiac physical f ndings.

Physical examination should also assess for signs of atherosclerotic disease in more acces-
sible vascular beds. For example, carotid bruits may indicate the presence of cerebrovascular
disease, whereas femoral artery bruits or diminished pulses in the lower extremities can be a
clue to peripheral arterial disease (see Chapter 15).

Diagnostic Studies
Once angina is suspected, several diagnostic procedures may be helpful in confrming myo-
cardial ischemia as the cause. Because many of these tests are costly, it is important to choose
the appropriate studies for each patient.

Hectrocardiogram
One of the most useful tools is an electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained during an anginal epi-
sode. Although this is easy to arrange when symptoms occur in hospitalized patients, it may
not be possible to “catch” episodes in people seen on an outpatient basis. During myocardial
ischemia, ST-segment and T-wave changes can appear (Fig. 6-7). Acute ischemia usually
results in transient horizontal or downsloping ST-segment depressions and T-wave flattening
or inversions. Occasionally, ST-segment elevations are seen, suggesting more severe transmu-
ral myocardial ischemia, and can also be observed during the intense vasospasm of variant
angina. In contrast to the ECG of a patient with an acute MI, the ST deviations seen in patients
with stable angina quickly normalize with resolution of the patient’s symptoms. In fact,

— Ischemia
HGURE 6-6. Pathophysiology of physical signs during acute myocardial ischemia.
150 chapter 6
Normal Subendocardial ischemia Trans mural
ischemia
ST depression ST depression T wave ST elevation
(horizontal) (downs loping) inversion

HGURE 6-7. @mmon transient EGGabnormalities during ischemia. Subendocardial ischemia causes
SF-segment depressions and/or T-wave fattening or inversions. Severe transient transmural ischemia can result
in SFsegment elevations, similar to the early changes in acute myocardial infarction. When transient ischemia
resolves, so do the electrocardiographic changes.
ECGs obtained during periods free of ischemia are completely normal in approximately half
of patients with stable angina. In others, chronic “nondiagnostic” ST and T-wave deviations
may be present. Evidence of a previous MI (e.g., pathologic Q waves) on the ECG also points
to the presence of underlying coronary disease.

Stress Testing
Because ECGs obtained during or between episodes of chest discomfort may be normal, such
tracings do not rule out underlying ischemic heart disease. For this reason, provocative exer-
cise or pharmacologic stress tests are valuable diagnostic and prognostic aids.

Standard Exercise Testing
For many patients suspected of having CAD, a standard exercise test is performed. During
this test, the patient exercises on a treadmill or a stationary bicycle to progressively higher
workloads and is observed for the development of chest discomfort or excessive dyspnea.
The heart rate and ECG are continuously monitored, and blood pressure is checked at regular
intervals. The test is continued until angina develops, signs of myocardial ischemia appear
on the ECG, a target heart rate is achieved (85% of the maximal predicted heart rate [MHR];
the MHR is calculated as 220 beats/min minus the patient’s age), or the patient becomes too
fatigued to continue.

The test is considered abnormal if the patient’s typical chest discomfort is reproduced or
if ECG abnormalities consistent with ischemia develop (i.e., greater than 1 mm horizontal or
downsloping ST-segment depressions). Among patients who later undergo diagnostic coro-
nary angiography, the ECG changes noted above have a sensitivity of approximately 65% to
70% and specif city of 75% to 80% for the detection of anatomically signif cant CAD.

The stress test is considered markedly positive if one or more of the following signs of
severe ischemic heart disease occur: (1) ischemic ECG changes develop in the frst 3 min-
utes of exercise or persist 5 minutes after exercise has stopped; (2) the magnitude of the
ST-segment depressions is greater than 2 mm; (3) the systolic blood pressure abnormally falls
during exercise (i.e., resulting from ischemia-induced impairment of contractile function);
(4) high-grade ventricular arrhythmias develop; or (5) the patient cannot exercise for at least
2 minutes because of cardiopulmonary limitations. Patients with markedly positive tests are
more likely to have severe multivessel coronary disease.

The utility of a stress test may be affected by the patient’s medications. For example,
B-blockers or certain calcium channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem) may blunt the ability to
Ischemic Heart Disease 151
achieve the target heart rate. In these situations, one must consider the purpose of the stress
test. If it is to determine whether ischemic heart disease is present, then those medications
are typically withheld for 24 to 48 hours before the test. On the other hand, if the patient has
known ischemic heart disease and the purpose of the test is to assess the eff cacy of the cur-
rent medical regimen, testing should be performed while the patient takes his or her usual
antianginal medications.

Nuclear Imaging Studies

Since a standard exercise test relies on ischemia-related changes on the ECG, the test is
less useful in patients with baseline abnormalities of the ST segments (e.g., as seen in left
bundle branch block or LV hypertrophy). In addition, the standard exercise stress test some-
times yields equivocal results in patients for whom the clinical suspicion of ischemic heart
disease is high. In these situations, radionuclide imaging can be combined with exercise
testing to overcome these limitations and to increase the sensitivity and specif city of the
study.

As described in Chapter 3, during such myocardial perfusion imaging, a radionuclide
(commonly either a technetium-99m-—labeled compound or thallium-201) is injected intrave-
nously at peak exercise, after which imaging is performed. The radionuclide accumulates in
proportion to the degree of perfusion of viable myocardial cells. Therefore, areas of poor per-
fusion (i.e., regions of ischemia) during exercise do not accumulate radionuclide and appear
as “cold spots” on the image. However, irreversibly infarcted areas also do not take up the
radionuclide, and they too will appear as cold spots. To differentiate between transient isch-
emia and infarcted tissue, imaging is also performed at rest (either before or several hours
after the exercise portion of the test). If the cold spot flls in, a region of transient ischemia
has been identifed (Fig. 3-18). If the cold spot remains unchanged, a region of irreversible
infarction is likely.

Standard radionuclide exercise tests are 80% to 90% sensitive and approximately 80%
specif c for the detection of clinically signif cant CAD. Positron emission tomography (PET;
see Chapter 3), another form of nuclear stress imaging that is not as widely available, offers
superior spatial and temporal resolution, with sensitivity and specif city of 90% or greater.
Because these nuclear imaging techniques are expensive, their use in screening for CAD
should be reserved for (1) patients in whom baseline ECG abnormalities preclude interpreta-
tion of a standard exercise test or for (2) improvement in test sensitivity when standard stress
test results are discordant with the clinical suspicion of coronary disease.

Exercise Echocardiography
Exercise testing with echocardiographic imaging is another technique to diagnose myocardial
ischemia in patients with baseline ST or T-wave abnormalities or in those with equivocal stan-
dard stress tests. In this procedure, LV contractile function is assessed by echocardiography
at baseline and immediately after treadmill or bicycle exercise. The test indicates inducible
myocardial ischemia if regions of ventricular contractile dysfunction develop with exertion
and has a sensitivity of approximately 80% and a specif city of about 90% for the detection
of clinically signif cant CAD.

Pharmacologic Stress Tests
For patients unable to exercise (e.g., those with hip or knee arthritis), pharmacologic stress
testing can be performed instead using various agents, including vasodilators or inotropes.
The most common approach is to use a coronary vasodilator such as adenosine, regadenoson,
152 chapter 6

or dipyridamole. Adenosine and regadenoson bind to adenosine A,;, receptors on vascular
smooth muscle cells, resulting in coronary vasodilatation. As ischemic regions are already
maximally dilated (in compensation for the epicardial coronary stenoses), the vasodilatation
induced by these agents increases flow to the myocardium perfused by healthy coronary
arteries and thus “steals” blood away from the diseased segments. Dipyridamole causes a
similar effect indirectly, as it blocks normal cellular uptake and destruction of adenosine,
thereby increasing adenosine’s circulating concentration and subsequent stimulation of the
A,, receptor. Administration of these pharmacologic agents is typically coupled with nuclear
imaging, to reveal regions of impaired myocardial perfusion.

An alternative to vasodilating agents, pharmacologic stress testing can also be performed
using the inotrope dobutamine, which increases myocardial oxygen demand by augment-
ing heart rate and the force of contraction, thus simulating some of the effects of exercise.
Accompanying imaging (typically nuclear imaging or echocardiography) reveals regions of
drug-induced ischemia. Vasodilator pharmacologic stress testing is generally preferred over
dobutamine testing for the assessment of ischemia, as the former produces greater incre-
mental myocardial blood flow, and is technically easier and faster to perform. However, the
vasodilator agents can cause bronchospasm in patients with reactive airways disease (by
stimulating bronchiolar adenosine A,, receptors) and should be avoided in that population,
in whom dobutamine pharmacologic testing is therefore preferred. In addition, a vasodilator
study cannot be performed successfully in a patient who has been exposed to methylxan-
thines (e.g., caffeine consumption or use of the bronchodilator theophylline) on the day of
the study, as such agents competitively antagonize adenosine’s interaction with its receptor
and blunt its effect.

Qoronary Angiography
The most direct means of identifying coronary artery stenoses is by coronary angiog-
raphy, in which atherosclerotic lesions are visualized radiographically following the
injection of radiopaque contrast material into the artery (Fig. 6-8; also see Chapter 3).
Although generally safe, the procedure is associated with a small risk of complica-
tions directly related to its invasive nature. Therefore, coronary angiography is typically
= reserved for patients whose anginal symptoms do
t not respond adequately to pharmacologic therapy,
for those with an unstable presentation, or when
, the results of noninvasive testing are so abnormal
| . that severe CAD warranting revascularization is
likely.
When the degree of stenosis of a region of intra-
NN coronary plaque, or its hemodynamic signif cance,
is not clear, additional techniques can be applied in
the cardiac catheterization laboratory. For example,
fractional fow reserve (FFR) measurement is a
technique that can assess the functional severity of a
stenosis identif ed at angiography. A special manom-
eter-tipped guidewire inserted through the catheter
measures the pressure in the coronary artery distal to
the stenosis during induced vasodilatation. The FFR
FIGURE 6-8. Example of coronary angiography. value is equal to the pressure distal to the stenosis
Injection of the right coronary artery demonstrates a  (P,) relative to the pressure proximal to the stenosis
stenosis in the midportion of the vessel, indicated by jn the aorta (P,,).
the arrow. (Gourtesy of Pinak B Shah, MD, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA) FFR=P, / P,,
Ischemic Heart Disease 153

A higher FFR value indicates a less severe stenosis. FFR values less than 0.75 to 0.80 iden-
tify severe stenoses that typically warrant mechanical intervention.

Although coronary angiography is considered the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of
CAD, it should be noted that it provides only anatomic information. The clinical signif -
cance of lesions detected by angiography depends on both the degree of narrowing and
also on the pathophysiologic consequences. Therefore, treatment decisions are made not
only on the fnding of such stenoses but also by their functional effects, manifested by the
patient’s symptoms, the viability of the myocardial segments served by stenotic vessels, and
the degree of ventricular contractile dysfunction. Furthermore, standard arteriography does
not reveal the composition of coronary atherosclerotic plaque or its vulnerability to rupture
(see Chapter 5).

Noninvasive Imaging of @ronary Arteries

Diagnostic alternatives to coronary angiography have been developed to noninvasively visual-
ize the coronary arteries. Coronary CT angiography (CCTA) performed with administration of
intravenous contrast (see Fig. 3.21) can visualize stenoses of greater than 50% of the coronary
lumen with an approximate sensitivity of 90% and specif city of 65% to 90%. CCTA is con-
sidered an alternative to stress testing to help exclude signif cant CAD in low- to intermediate-
risk patients who present with undef ned chest pain. The quality of images in CCTA is limited
by cardiac motion, which can be reduced by slowing the heart rate with administration of a
beta-blocker.

Cardiac CT without contrast administration can be used as a Screening test to detect coro-
nary artery calcif cation (CAC) as described in Chapter 3. CAC correlates with the extent of
atherosclerosis and thus estimates plaque burden, but does not quantify individual coronary
stenoses. The absence of CAC is a clinically useful f nding as it strongly predicts the absence
of CAD.

Natural History
The patient with chronic angina may show no change in a stable pattern of ischemia for many
years. In some patients, however, the course may be punctuated by the occurrence of unstable
angina, MI, or sudden cardiac death. These complications are often related to acute throm-
bosis at the site of disrupted atherosclerotic plaque (see Chapter 7). Why some patients, but
not others, sustain these complications remains a subject of intense clinical and basic science
investigation and may relate to the vulnerability of plaque to rupture.

The mortality associated with CAD has declined signif cantly in recent decades: the age-
adjusted death rate has fallen by more than 50%. This is likely related to (1) atherosclerotic
risk reduction through improved lifestyle changes (e.g., less tobacco use, less dietary fat
consumption, and more exercise); (2) improved therapeutic strategies and longevity follow-
ing acute coronary syndromes (see Chapter 7); and (3) advances in the pharmacologic and
mechanical therapies for chronic CAD.

TREATVENT
The goals of therapy in chronic ischemic heart disease are to decrease the frequency of angi-
nal attacks, to prevent acute coronary syndromes such as MI, and to prolong survival. A long-
term crucial step is to address the risk factors that led to the development of atherosclerotic
coronary disease. Data convincingly demonstrate the benef t of smoking cessation, cholesterol
improvement, and blood pressure control in lowering the risk of coronary disease events (see
Chapter 5). Improvements in other risk factors for CAD, including serum glucose in diabetics,
154 chapter 6
obesity and physical inactivity, may also reduce the risk of adverse outcomes although the
benef ts of these interventions are less well documented.

The following sections describe medical and surgical strategies to (1) reduce ischemia and
its symptoms by restoring the balance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand and
(2) prevent acute coronary syndromes and death in patients with chronic CAD.

Medical Treatment of an Acute Episode of Angina

When experiencing acute angina, the patient should cease physical activity. Sublingual nitro-
glycerin, an organic nitrate, is the drug of choice in this situation. Placed under the tongue,
this medication produces a slight burning sensation as it is absorbed through the mucosa, and
it begins to take effect in 1 to 2 minutes. Nitrates relieve ischemia primarily through vascular
smooth muscle relaxation, particularly venodilatation. Venodilatation reduces venous return
to the heart, with a subsequent decline in LV volume (a determinant of wall stress). The lat-
ter decreases myocardial oxygen consumption, thus helping to restore oxygen balance in the
ischemic heart.

A second action of nitrates is to dilate the coronary vasculature, with subsequent aug-
mentation of coronary blood flow. This effect may be of little value in patients with angina
in whom maximal coronary dilatation has already resulted from the accumulation of local
metabolites. However, when coronary vasospasm plays a role in the development of ischemia,
nitrate-induced coronary vasodilatation may be particularly benef cial.

Medical Treatment to Prevent Recurrent Ischemic Episodes
Pharmacologic agents are also the frst line of defense in the prevention of anginal attacks.
The goal of these agents is to decrease the cardiac workload (i.e., reduce myocardial oxy-
gen demand) and to increase myocardial perfusion. The three classes of medications most
commonly used are B-adrenergic blockers, organic nitrates, and calcium channel blockers
(Table 6-3).

B-Blockers (see Chapter 17) exert their antianginal effect primarily by reducing myocar-
dial oxygen demand. They are directed against B-receptors, of which there are two classes:
B,-adrenergic receptors are restricted to the myocardium, whereas f,-adrenergic recep-
tors are located throughout the blood vessels and the bronchial tree. The stimulation of
Bi-receptors by endogenous catecholamines and exogenous sympathomimetic drugs
increases heart rate and contractility. Consequently, B-adrenergic antagonists decrease the
force of ventricular contraction and heart rate, thereby relieving ischemia by reducing myo-
cardial oxygen demand. In addition, slowing the heart rate may benef t myocardial oxygen
supply by augmenting the time spent in diastole, the phase when coronary perfusion pri-
marily occurs.

In addition to suppressing angina, several studies have shown that B-blockers decrease the
rates of recurrent infarction and mortality following an acute MI (see Chapter 7). Moreover,
they have been shown to reduce the likelihood of an initial MI in patients with hypertension.
Thus, B-blockers are frst-line chronic therapy in the treatment of CAD.

B-Blockers are generally well tolerated but have several potential side effects. For exam-
ple, they may precipitate bronchospasm in patients with underlying asthma by antagonizing
B.-receptors in the bronchial tree. Although B,-selective blockers are theoretically less likely to
exacerbate bronchospasm in such patients, drug selectivity for the B,-receptor is not complete,
and in general, all B-blockers should be used cautiously, or avoided, in patients with signif -
cant obstructive airway disease.

B-Blockers are also generally not used in patients with acutely decompensated LV dys-
function because they could intensify heart failure symptoms by further reducing inotropy.
(However, as described in Chapter 9, B-blockers actually improve outcomes in patients with
Ischemic Heart Disease 155
Drug Cass Mechanism of Action Adverse EHfects
Organic nitrates | Myocardial O, demand ° Headache
| Preload (venodilatation) — » Hypotension
t O, supply ° Ref ex tachycardia
t Goronary perfusion
| Coronary vasospasm
B-Blockers | Myocardial O, demand * Excessive bradycardia
| @ntractility * | LVcontractile function
| Heart rate * Bronchoconstriction
* May mask hypoglycemic
symptoms
° Fatigue
Qilcium channel blockers (agent | Myocardial O, demand ° Headache, f ushing
specific; see footnote) | Preload (venodilatation) |» | LVcontractility (V D)
| Wall stress (| BP) ° Marked bradycardia (VY D)
| @ntractility (VY D) * Edema (especially N, D)
| Heart rate (V D) * @nstipation (especially V)
t O; supply
? Gronary perfusion
| Coronary vasospasm
Ranolazine | Late phase inward * Dizziness, headache
sodium current * @nstipation, nausea
a
BP, blood pressure; D, diltiazem; LV left ventricular; N, nifedipine and other dihydropyridine calcium channel
antagonists; V verapamil.
stable chronic heart failure conditions.) B-Blockers are also relatively contraindicated in
patients with marked bradycardia or certain types of heart block to avoid additional impair-
ment of electrical conduction.

B-Blockers sometimes cause fatigue and sexual dysfunction. They should be used with
caution in insulin-treated diabetic patients because they can mask tachycardia and other
catecholamine-mediated responses that can warn of hypoglycemia. One might also expect
that B-blockers would decrease myocardial blood perfusion by blocking the vasodilating B,-
adrenergic receptors of the coronary arteries. However, this effect is usually attenuated by
autoregulation and vasodilatation of the coronary vessels owing to the accumulation of local
metabolites.

Organic nitrates (e.g., nitroglycerin, isosorbide dinitrate, isosorbide mononitrate), as pre-
viously mentioned, relieve ischemia primarily through venodilatation (i.e., lower wall stress
results from a smaller ventricular radius) and possibly through coronary vasodilatation. The
organic nitrates are the oldest of the antianginal drugs and come in several preparations (also
described in Chapter 17). Sublingual nitroglycerin tablets or sprays are used in the treatment
of acute attacks because of their rapid onset of action. In addition, when taken immediately
before a person engages in activities known to provoke angina, these rapidly acting nitrates
are useful as prophylaxis against anginal attacks.

Longer-acting anginal prevention can be achieved through a variety of nitrate prepara-
tions, including oral tablets of isosorbide dinitrate (or mononitrate) or a transdermal nitro-
glycerin patch, which is applied once a day. A limitation to chronic nitrate therapy is the
development of drug tolerance (i.e., decreased effectiveness of the drug during continued
156 chapter 6
administration), which occurs to some degree in most patients. This undesired effect can be
overcome by providing a nitrate-free interval for several hours each day, usually while the
patient sleeps.

There is no evidence that nitrates improve survival or prevent infarctions in patients
with chronic CAD, and they are used purely for symptomatic relief. Common side effects
include headache, light-headedness, and palpitations induced by vasodilatation and reflex
sinus tachycardia. The latter can be prevented by combining a B-blocker with the nitrate
regimen.

Calcium channel blockers (see Chapter 17) antagonize voltage-gated L-type calcium
channels, but the actions of the individual drugs of this group vary. The dihydropyridines
(e.g., nifedipine and amlodipine) are potent vasodilators. They relieve myocardial ischemia
by (1) decreasing oxygen demand (venodilatation reduces ventricular flling and size, arte-
rial dilation reduces the resistance against which the left ventricle contracts, and both
actions reduce wall stress) and (2) increasing myocardial oxygen supply via coronary dila-
tation. By the latter mechanism, they are also potent agents for the relief of coronary artery
vasospasm.

Nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (verapamil and diltiazem) also act as vaso-
dilators but are not as potent in this regard as the dihydropyridines. However, these agents
have additional benef cial antianginal effects stemming from their more potent cardiac depres-
sant actions: they reduce the force of ventricular contraction (contractility) and slow the heart
rate. Accordingly, verapamil and diltiazem also decrease myocardial oxygen demand by these
mechanisms.

Questions have been raised about the safety of short-acting calcium channel—blocking
drugs in the treatment of ischemic heart disease. In meta-analyses of randomized trials, these
drugs have been associated with an increased incidence of MI and mortality. The adverse
effect may relate to the rapid hemodynamic effects and blood pressure swings induced by the
short-acting agents. Therefore, only long-acting calcium channel blockers (i.e., preparations
taken once a day) are recommended in the treatment of chronic angina, generally as second-
line drugs if symptoms are not controlled by B-blockers and nitrates.

The three standard groups of antianginal drugs described in this section can be used
alone or in combination. However, care should be taken in combining a B-blocker with a
nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (verapamil or diltiazem) because the additive
negative chronotropic effect can cause excessive bradycardia and the combined negative
inotropic effect could precipitate heart failure in patients with LV contractile dysfunction.

Ranolazine, a fourth type of anti-ischemic therapy, has been shown to decrease the fre-
quency of anginal episodes and improve exercise capacity in patients with chronic CAD but
differs from other anti-ischemic drugs in that it does not affect the heart rate or blood pres-
sure. Although its mechanism of action has not been fully elucidated, it is believed to inhibit
the late phase of the action potential’s inward sodium current (Iy,*) in ventricular myocytes.
That late phase tends to be abnormally enhanced in ischemic myocardium, and the associ-
ated increased sodium influx results in higher-than-normal intracellular Ca** (mediated by
the trans-sarcolemmal Na*—Ca** exchanger; see Fig. 1.10). Such calcium overload is thought
to result in impaired diastolic relaxation and contractile ineff ciency. Inhibition of the late Iy,*
by ranolazine counters these pathologic effects. Clinical studies have supported ranolazine’s
effectiveness in reducing angina, and its long-term safety, when used alone or in combination
with other antianginal agents.

Although useful in controlling symptoms of angina, none of the antianginal drug groups
has been shown to slow or reverse the atherosclerotic process responsible for the arterial
lesions of chronic CAD. Moreover, although B-blockers have demonstrated mortality benef ts
in patients after MI, none of these agents has been shown to improve longevity in patients
with chronic stable angina and preserved LV function.
Ischemic Heart Disease 157
Medical Treatment to Prevent Acute Cardiac Events

Platelet aggregation and thrombosis are key elements in the pathophysiology of acute MI and
unstable angina (see Chapter 7). Antiplatelet therapy reduces the risk of these acute coro-
nary syndromes in patients with chronic angina and should be a standard part of the regimen
used to treat CAD. For example, aspirin has antithrombotic actions through the inhibition
of synthesis of thromboxane A;, a mediator of platelet activation and aggregation, as well
as anti-inflammatory properties that may be important in stabilizing atheromatous plaque.
Unless contraindications are present (e.g., allergy or gastric bleeding), aspirin should be con-
tinued indef nitely in all patients with CAD.

Platelet P2Y,, ADP receptor antagonists, such as clopidogrel, also prevent platelet acti-
vation and aggregation (see Chapter 17). They can be used as an antiplatelet substitute in
patients who are allergic to aspirin. In addition, the combination of aspirin and a P2Y,, inhib-
itor is superior to aspirin alone in reducing death and ischemic complications in patients
with acute coronary syndromes, in those undergoing elective percutaneous coronary stent-
ing, and in patients with a history of MI.

Lipid-regulating therapy is an additional approach to reduce cardiovascular clinical
events in patients with CAD. In particular, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (“statins”) lower
MI and death rates in patients with established coronary disease and in those at high risk
of developing CAD. The benef ts of statin therapy are believed to extend beyond their lipid-
altering effects, because there is evidence that they decrease vascular inflammation and
improve endothelial cell dysfunction and thus may help stabilize atherosclerotic plaques.
Moreover, trials of patients with established atherosclerotic disease have demonstrated a
linear relationship between the magnitude of LDL lowering and the reduction in cardiovas-
cular risk. Thus, high-intensity lipid lowering (resulting in reduction of LDL by more than
50% ) is superior to less intense lipid-lowering therapy in preventing future ischemic events
and cardiovascular death. An LDL less than 70 mg/dL is a common goal for patients with
CAD, and recent evidence suggests that even patients with a baseline LDL of 70 mg/dL
benef t from high-intensity lipid lowering. As a result, current national guidelines no lon-
ger recommend treating to a specif c target LDL level. Rather, it is recommended that all
patients with CAD receive a high-intensity statin regimen, with the goal of at least 50%
reduction in LDL.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, benef cial in the treatment of hyper-
tension (see Chapter 13), heart failure (see Chapter 9), and following MI (see Chapter 7), have
also been studied as chronic therapy for patients with stable CAD not complicated by heart
failure. Some (but not all) of these trials have shown reduced rates of death, MI, and stroke.
Thus, many cardiologists recommend that an ACE inhibitor be included in the medical regi-
men of patients with chronic CAD.

Revascularization

Patients with angina that becomes asymptomatic during pharmacologic therapy are usually
monitored by their physicians with continued emphasis on cardiac risk factor reduction.
However, coronary revascularization is pursued if (1) the patient’s symptoms of angina do not
respond adequately to antianginal drug therapy, (2) unacceptable side effects of medications
occur, or (3) the patient is found to have high-risk coronary disease for which revasculariza-
tion is known to improve survival (as described in the next section). The two techniques used
to accomplish mechanical revascularization are percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.

PCI includes percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), a procedure per-
formed under fluoroscopy in which a balloon-tipped catheter is inserted through a peripheral
artery (usually femoral, radial, or brachial) and maneuvered into the stenotic segment of a
158 chapter 6

coronary vessel. The balloon at the end of the catheter is then inflated under high pressure
to dilate the stenosis, after which the balloon is deflated and the catheter is removed from
the body. The improvement in the size of the coronary lumen increases coronary perfusion
and myocardial oxygen supply. Effective dilatation of the stenosis results from compression
of the atherosclerotic plaque and often by creating a fracture within the lesion and stretching
the underlying media. The risk of MI during the procedure is less than 1.5%, and mortality is
less than 1%. Unfortunately, approximately one third of patients who undergo balloon angio-
plasty develop recurrent symptoms within 6 months owing to restenosis of the dilated artery
and require additional coronary interventions.

For this reason, coronary stents were developed for implantation at the time of PCI, and
have been shown to signif cantly reduce the rate of restenosis. Such stents are slender, cage-
like metal support devices that in their collapsed conf guration can be threaded into the
region of stenosis by a catheter. Once in position, the stent is expanded into its open posi-
tion by inflating a high-pressure balloon in its interior (Fig. 6-9). The balloon and attached
catheter are then removed, but the stent is left permanently in place to serve as a scaffold to
maintain arterial patency. Because stents are thrombogenic, a combination of oral antiplatelet
agents (commonly, aspirin plus a platelet P2Y,, receptor antagonist, such as clopidogrel) is
crucial after stent implantation.

Compared with conventional balloon angioplasty, stent implantation decreases restenosis
rates and reduces the need for repeat PCIs. Although restenosis resulting from vessel elastic
recoil is greatly diminished by standard metal stent placement, neointimal proliferation (i.e.,
migration of smooth muscle cells and production of extracellular matrix) remains an impor-
tant cause of in-stent restenosis and recurrent anginal symptoms.

To address the problem of in-stent restenosis after PCI, drug-eluting stents were devised.
These special stents are fabricated with a polymer coat that incorporates an antiproliferative
medication such as sirolimus (an immunosuppressive agent that inhibits T-cell activation),
everolimus (an immunosuppressive similar to sirolimus), or paclitaxel (which interferes with
cellular microtubule function). The medication is released from the stent over a period of
2 to 4 weeks, and this approach has shown great effect at preventing neointimal proliferation

Artery wall Stenosis

) eSeSeseseses

Balloon Stent in

catheter collapsed
A configuration

——

— SSSSSSS
B Balloon inflation to expand stent
HGURE6-9. Placement of a coronary artery stent.

A. Astent, in its original collapsed state, is advanced into
ASAE the coronary stenosis on a balloon catheter. B The balloon
QELS is inf ated to expand the stent. C The balloon is def ated,
CSSSSS _ and the catheter is removed from the body, leaving the

CT, stent permanently in place.
Ischemic Heart Disease 159
and reducing the need for repeat revascularization by
more than half. However, just as neointimal prolifera-

Internal tion is slowed, so too is protective endothelialization
Aorta artery graf of the stent. The delay in endothelial cell coverage of
SVC the metal struts leaves patients at risk for thrombus
“ Pulmonary formation within the stent should antiplatelet agents
Saphenous . artery be di tinued turely. Therefor rolonged
vein graft € discontinued prematurely. erelore, prolonge
: LCx courses of combination antiplatelet therapy (e.g., aspi-
RCA J = ff rin plus a platelet P2Y,, receptor antagonist for at least
a | aw LAD 12 months) followed by aspirin indef nitely are neces-
‘A ,\ \ sary for patients who receive drug-eluting stents.
i¢ : \ Although percutaneous revascularization tech-
f \ niques are generally superior to standard medical
im therapy for relief of angina, it is important to note that
, in the setting of stable coronary disease (i.e., not an
Obstructing
plaque acute coronary syndrome), they have not been shown
to reduce the risk of MI or death.
FIGURE 6-10. Coronary artery bypass surgery. Two CABG surgery entails grafting portions of a
types of bypasses are illustrated: (1) the left internal Ly .
mammary artery originates from the left subclavian patient’s native blood vessels to bypass obstructed
artery, and in this schematic, it is anastomosed to the  COFonary arteries. Two types of surgical grafts are used
left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery distal (Fig. 6-10). The frst employs native veins—typically, a
to obstructing plaque; (2) one end of a saphenous section of the saphenous vein (a “superfluous” vessel
vein graft is sutured to the proximal aorta and the removed from the leg) that is sutured from the base
other end to the right coronary artery (RCA) distal to of the aorta to a coronary segment downstream from
a stenotic segment. the region of stenosis. The second method uses arterial
grafts—most commonly, an internal mammary artery
(IMA, a “superfluous” branch of each subclavian artery)—that can be directly anastomosed
distal to a stenotic coronary site. Vein grafts have a patency rate of up to 80% at 12 months
but are vulnerable to accelerated atherosclerosis; 10 years after surgery, more than 50% have
occluded. In contrast, IMA grafts are more resistant to atherosclerosis with a patency rate of
90% at 10 years. Therefore, IMA grafts are often used to perfuse sites of critical flow such as
the left anterior descending artery. Clinical trial evidence supports the use of aggressive lipid-
lowering drug therapy after CABG to improve the long-term patency rates of bypass grafts.

In recent years, less invasive surgical alternatives to conventional CABG have been
explored. These include “minimally invasive” operations with smaller incisions, the use of
transcutaneous ports with videoscopic robotic assistance, and “off-pump” procedures, which
avoid the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (heart-lung) machines. While there are theoretical
advantages of avoiding the latter, studies examining off-pump procedures in comparison with
standard CABG have shown comparable mortality benef t, but poorer graft patency over time
and an increased need for future revascularization. Additionally, there have been no major
high-quality studies comparing benefts of minimally invasive operations to conventional
CABG. In general, patient-specifc risks and characteristics are considered by the surgeon
when selecting which type of bypass procedure to undertake.

Medical versus Revascularization Therapy
Many patients with chronic, stable angina can be successfully managed with pharmacologic
therapy alone. However, if anginal symptoms prove refractory despite maximal pharmacologic
therapy, or if intolerable drug side effects develop, coronary angiography is recommended for
further therapeutic planning. Moreover, for patients whose angina is controlled by medica-
tions, it is standard to perform noninvasive testing (e.g., exercise testing, echocardiography)
to identify those with high-risk disease, because the long-term prognosis for such patients can
160 chapter 6
Percutaneous Qronary Interventions (PQ)  ronary Artery Bypass Gaft Surgery (CABG
Less invasive than CABG More effective for long-term relief of angina than
PC or pharmacologic therapy
Shorter hospital stay and Mbst complete revascularization
easier recuperation than CABG
Superior to pharmacologic therapy for Survival advantage in patients with
relief of angina ° >50% left main coronary artery stenosis
* Miltivessel coronary disease, especially if LV con-
tractile function is impaired

OOOO———eeeeeeeerrrr—“ eC

LV left ventricle.

be improved by coronary revascularization. Those with high-risk noninvasive test f ndings

then typically proceed to coronary angiography.

In general, patients with stable angina found to have a large amount of myocardium at
ischemic risk, such as those with severe (=>70% ) stenoses in all three major coronary arter-
ies (especially when LV contractile function is reduced), those with multivessel disease
that includes a critical narrowing of the proximal left anterior descending artery (which
thereby threatens a large portion of the left ventricle), or those with a high-grade (>50%)
stenosis of the left main coronary artery, achieve a survival benef t from CABG compared
with medical therapy. More recent studies that have compared percutaneous coronary
revascularization with CABG have demonstrated that CABG leads to a survival benef t in
patients with stable angina who have severe stenoses in all three coronary arteries, a high-
grade stenosis in the left main coronary artery, or diabetes (especially with multivessel
disease). In contrast, PCI is a reasonable approach in patients with less extensive disease
(in whom survival benef t of CABG over PCI has not been shown) and in those at high risk
of undergoing surgery (Table 6-4).

Each of the described approaches for the treatment of coronary disease is benef ting
from rapidly developing research advancements. New surgical techniques (increased use
of various arterial grafts, less invasive operations), new drug-eluting stents (e.g., incor-
poration of bioabsorbable/biodegradable polymers to decrease late stent thrombosis),
novel adjuncts to stenting (potent antithrombotic drugs), and progress in pharmacologic
management (e.g., aggressive use of statins and antithrombotic drugs) will likely further
improve outcomes and better defne the best therapeutic approaches for specif c subsets
of patients with chronic CAD.

SUMMARY

° Cardiac ischemia results from an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and
demand.

e Determinants of myocardial oxygen supply are (1) the oxygen content of the blood and
(2) coronary blood flow (which is dependent on the coronary perfusion pressure and coro-
nary vascular resistance).

° Key regulators of myocardial oxygen demand include (1) the heart rate, (2) contractility, and
(3) myocardial wall stress.

e In the presence of coronary artery disease, myocardial oxygen supply is compromised by
atherosclerotic plaques that narrow the vascular lumen (reducing coronary blood flow) and
by endothelial cell dysfunction that causes inappropriate vasoconstriction of coronary resis-
tance vessels.
Ischemic Heart Disease 161

e Angina pectoris is the most frequent symptom of intermittent myocardial ischemia.

e The diagnosis of angina relies heavily on the patient’s description of the discomfort and can
be aided by laboratory studies (e.g., exercise or pharmacologic stress testing).

e Angina may be accompanied by signs and symptoms of adrenergic stimulation, pulmonary
congestion, and transient left ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction.

e Standard pharmacologic therapy for chronic angina includes agents to prevent ischemia and
relieve symptoms (f-blockers, nitrates, calcium channel antagonists, alone or in combina-
tion) as well as agents that reduce the risk of acute coronary syndromes and death (aspirin,
statins, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors).

° Modif able risk factors for atherosclerosis (1.e., dyslipidemia, smoking, hypertension, and
diabetes) should be addressed.

e Revascularization with PCI or CABG surgery provides relief from ischemia in patients with
chronic angina who are refractory to, or unable to tolerate, medical therapy. CABG confers
improved survival rates to certain high-risk groups.

Acknowledgments

Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were June-Wha Rhee, MD; Haley Naik, MD;

Christopher P. Chiodo, MD; Carey Farquhar, MD; Anurag Gupta, MD; Rainu Kaushal, MD;

William Carlson, MD; Michael E. Mendelsohn MD; and Patrick T. O’Gara, MD.

Additional Reading

Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, et al. Long-term use of Mohr FW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Coronary
ticagrelor in patients with prior myocardial infarction. artery bypass graft surgery versus percutaneous
N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1791-1800. coronary intervention in patients with three-vessel

Douglas PS, Hoffman U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of disease and left main coronary disease: 5-year follow-
Anatomical versus Functional Testing for Coronary Artery up of the randomized, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet.
Disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1291—-1300. 2013;381(9867):629-638.

Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. FREEDOM Trial Park S-J, Ahn J-M, Kim Y-H, et al. Trial of everolimus-eluting
Investigators. Strategies for multivessel revascularization in stents or bypass surgery for coronary disease. N Engl J Med.
patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2375-2384. 2015;372:1204-1212.

Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/ AHA/ ACP/ Tonino PA, De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, et al. FAME Study
AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the diagnosis and Investigators. Fractional flow reserve versus angiography for
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: guiding percutaneous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med.
executive Summary. Circulation. 2012;126:3097-3137. 2009;360:213-224.

Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/ AHA/ Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, et al. STITCH Investigators.
SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention: Coronary-artery bypass surgery in patients with left ven-
executive summary. Circulation. 2011;124:2574—2609. tricular dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1607—1616.
¥ , =
a
t,
Acute Coronary :
=
Syndromes |. -
Jayme Wilder
Marc S. Sabatine
Leonard S. Lilly -
——
Chapter Outline A cute coronary syndromes (ACSs) are life-threatening con-
a ditions that can punctuate the course of patients with
ees of Acute Coronary coronary artery disease at any time. These syndromes form a
7 Hemostasis continuum that ranges from an unstable pattern of angina pec-
Endogenous Antithrombotic toris to the development of a large acute myocardial infarc-
Mechanisms tion (M), a condition of irreversible necrosis of heart muscle
Pathogenesis of Coronary Thrombosis (Table 7-1). All forms of ACS share a common initiating patho-
Nonatheroscierotic Causes oF physiologic mechanism, as this chapter examines.
ponte Mocardial Infarction The frequency of AGS is staggering: more than 1.4 mil-
Pathology and Pathophysiology ; . . . .
Pathologic-Evelution-ofinfarction lion people are admitted to hospitals in the United States
PauncoonalAlterarone each year with these conditions. Within the year after a frst
Cinical Features of Acute @ronary M, 19% of men and 26% of women will die. Despite these
Syndromes daunting statistics, mortality associated with AGS has actu-
Treatment of Acute Cbronary chapter considers the events that lead to an AG, the path-
Syndromes ologic and functional changes that follow, and therapeutic
Acute Treatment of Unstable approaches that ameliorate the aberrant pathophysiology.
Angina and Non—ST-Hevation
Myocardial Infarction
Acute Treatment of SHevation PATHOGENESIS OF ACUTE CORONARY
Myocardial Infarction SYNDROVES
Adjunctive Therapies
More than 90% of ACSs result from disruption of an ath-
erosclerotic plaque with subsequent platelet aggregation
and formation of an intracoronary thrombus. The throm-
—
