.
+ i ‘w
e
Diseases of the /
° ° +.
Pericardium |.
D) ome
Leonard S. Lilly
. —-
Chapter Outline D iseases of the pericardium form a spectrum that ranges
/ from benign, self-limited pericarditis to life-threatening
oes “eee cardiac tamponade. The clinical manifestations of these dis-
ute Pericarditis ; ;
Biology orders and approaches to their management can be predicted
Pathology from an understanding of pericardial anatomy and pathophys-
Cinical Features iology, as presented in this chapter.
Diagnostic Studies
Treatment
Pericardial Effusion ANATOMY AND FUNCITON
—— ‘ol The pericardium is a two-layered sac that encircles the
on oy _ sy heart. The inner serosal layer (visceral pericardium) adheres
Dione Sua to the outer wall of the heart and is reflected back on itself,
a a at the level of the great vessels, to line the tough f brous
a outer layer (parietal pericardium). A thin flm of pericar-
Path. . ‘ol friction between them.
7 a vo ob The pericardium appears to serve three functions: (1) it
— — f xes the heart within the mediastinum and limits its motion,
fee ges (2) it prevents extreme dilatation of the heart during sud-
@ hectae Pe ‘carditi den rises of intracardiac volume, and (3) it may function
a 4 Path _ . as a barrier to limit the spread of infection from the adja-
marhole AM eA sone cent lungs. However, patients with complete absence of the
i OBy pericardium (either congenitally or after surgical removal)
Pathophysiology
Cini 7 are generally asymptomatic, casting doubt on its actual
—— importance in normal physiology. Yet like the unnecessary
appendix, the pericardium can become diseased and cause
great harm.
334
Diseases of the Pericardium 335

The most common affliction of the pericardium is acute pericarditis, which refers to inflam-
mation of its layers. Many disease states and etiologic agents can produce this syndrome
(Table 14-1), the most frequent of which are described here.

Fiology

Infectious

Idiopathic and Viral Pericarditis
Acute pericarditis is most often of idiopathic origin, meaning that the actual cause is unknown.
However, serologic studies have demonstrated that many such episodes are actually caused
by viral infection, especially by echovirus or coxsackievirus group B. Although a viral origin
could be confrmed in infected patients by comparing antiviral titers of acute and convales-
cent serum, this is rarely done in the clinical setting because the patient has usually recovered
by the time those results would be available. Thus, idiopathic and viral pericarditis are con-
sidered similar clinical entities, and the terms are used interchangeably.

Other viruses known to cause pericarditis include those responsible for influenza, vari-
cella, mumps, hepatitis B, and infectious mononucleosis. Pericarditis is the most common
manifestation of cardiovascular disease in patients with AIDS, arising from HIV infection
itself or from superimposed tuberculous or other bacterial infections in this immunocompro-
mised population.

Tuberculous Pericarditis
Although tuberculosis remains a worldwide problem, its incidence in the United States is low.
It is, however, an important cause of pericarditis in immunosuppressed patients. Tuberculous
pericarditis arises from reactivation of the organism in mediastinal lymph nodes, with spread
into the pericardium. It can also extend directly from a site of tuberculosis within the lungs,
or the organism can arrive at the pericardium by hematogenous dissemination.
Nontuberculous Bacterial Pericarditis (Purulent Pericarditis)
Bacterial pericarditis is a fulminant illness but is rare in otherwise healthy persons; it is
most likely to occur in immunocompromised patients, including those with severe burns
and malignancies. Pneumococci and staphylococci are responsible most frequently, whereas
TABLE 14-1
Infectious

Viral

Tuberculosis

Pyogenic bacteria

Noninfectious

Postmyocardial infarction or after cardiac surgery

Uremia

Neoplastic disease

Radiation induced

Cnnective tissue diseases

Drug induced
I
336 Chapter 14
gram-negative infection occurs less often. Mechanisms by which bacterial invasion of
the pericardium develops include (1) perforating trauma to the chest (e.g., stab wound);
(2) contamination during chest surgery; (3) extension of an intracardiac infection (i.e.,
infective endocarditis); (4) extension of pneumonia or a subdiaphragmatic infection; and
(5) hematogenous spread from a remote infection.

Noninfectious

Pericarditis following Myocardial Infarction
There are two forms of pericarditis associated with acute myocardial infarction (MI). The
early type occurs within the frst few days after an MI. It likely results from inflammation
extending from the epicardial surface of the injured myocardium to the adjacent pericardium;
therefore, it is more common in patients with transmural (as opposed to subendocardial)
infarctions. The prognosis following acute MI is not affected by the presence of pericarditis;
its major importance is in distinguishing it from the pain of recurrent myocardial ischemia.
This form of pericarditis occurs in fewer than 5% of patients with acute MI who are treated
with acute reperfusion strategies (see Chapter 7), but it is more common in those who are not
(and who, therefore, sustain larger infarctions).

The second form of post-MI pericarditis is known as Dressler syndrome, which can develop

2 weeks to several months following an acute infarction. Its cause is unknown, but it is
thought to be of autoimmune origin, possibly directed against antigens released from necrotic
myocardial cells. Dressler syndrome has become very rare since the advent of reperfusion
therapies for acute MI. A clinically similar form of pericarditis may occur weeks to months
following heart surgery, termed postpericardiotomy pericarditis.

Uremic Pericarditis
Pericarditis is a potentially serious complication of untreated chronic renal failure. While its
pathogenesis in this setting is unknown, it has become uncommon with the widespread avail-
ability of dialysis. Pericarditis may also appear for the frst time in patients already treated
with chronic dialysis therapy, and often responds to intensif cation of dialysis.

Neoplastic Pericarditis
Tumor involvement of the pericardium most commonly results from metastatic spread or
local invasion by cancer of the lung, breast, or lymphoma. Primary tumors of the pericardium
are rare. Neoplastic effusions are usually large and hemorrhagic and frequently lead to cardiac
tamponade, a life-threatening complication described later in the chapter.

Radiation-Induced Pericarditis
Pericarditis may complicate radiation therapy to the thorax (e.g., administered for the treat-
ment of certain tumors), especially if the cumulative dose has exceeded 4,000 cGy. Radiation-
induced damage causes a local inflammatory response that can result in pericardial effusions
and ultimately fbrosis. Cytologic examination of the pericardial fluid helps to distinguish
radiation-induced pericardial damage from that of tumor invasion.

Pericarditis Associated with Connective Tissue Diseases
Pericardial involvement is common in many connective tissue diseases, including systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis, and progressive systemic sclerosis. For
example, 20% to 40% of patients with SLE experience clinically detectable pericarditis during
Diseases of the Pericardium 337
the course of the disease. Customary treatment of the underlying connective tissue disease
usually ameliorates the pericarditis as well.

Drug-Induced Pericarditis
Several pharmaceutical agents can cause pericarditis as a side effect, often by inducing a
systemic lupus-like syndrome (Table 14-2). These drugs include the antiarrhythmic procain-
amide and the vasodilator hydralazine. Drug-induced pericarditis usually abates when the
causative agent is discontinued.

Pathogenesis
Similar to other inflammatory processes, pericarditis is characterized by three stages: (1) local
vasodilation with transudation of protein-poor, cell-free fluid into the pericardial space;
(2) increased vascular permeability, with leak of protein into the pericardial space; and
(3) leukocyte exudation, initially by neutrophils, followed later by mononuclear cells.

The leukocytes are of critical importance because they help contain or eliminate the offend-
ing infectious or autoimmune agent. However, metabolic products released by these cells may
prolong inflammation, cause pain and local cellular damage, and mediate somatic symptoms
such as fever. Therefore, the immune response to pericardial injury may signif cantly contrib-
ute to tissue damage and symptomatology.

Pathology
The pathologic appearance of the pericardium depends on the underlying cause and severity
of inflammation. Serous pericarditis is characterized by scant polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes, lymphocytes, and histiocytes. The exudate is a thin fluid secreted by the mesothelial
cells lining the serosal surface of the pericardium. This likely represents the early inflamma-
tory response common to all types of acute pericarditis.

Serof brinous pericarditis is the most commonly observed morphologic pattern in
patients with pericarditis. The pericardial exudate contains plasma proteins, including f brin-
ogen, yielding a grossly rough and shaggy appearance (termed “bread and butter” pericar-
ditis). Portions of the visceral and parietal pericardium may become thickened and fused.
Occasionally, this process leads to a dense scar that restricts movement and diastolic f lling of
the cardiac chambers, as described later in the chapter.

Suppurative (or purulent) pericarditis is an intense inflammatory response associated
most commonly with bacterial infection. The serosal surfaces are erythematous and coated
with purulent exudate. Hemorrhagic pericarditis refers to a grossly bloody form of pericar-
dial inflammation and is most often caused by tuberculosis or malignancy.

Related to drug-induced SLE-like syndrome
Procainamide
Hydralazine
Methyldopa
Isoniazid
Phenytoin
Not related to drug-induced SLE-like syndrome

Anthracycline antineoplastic agents (doxorubicin, daunorubicin)

Mnoxidil
ee
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
338 chapter 14
Pleuritic chest pain
Fever
Pericardial friction rub
EG abnormalities
a
HG electrocardiogram.
Cinical Features
History
The most frequent symptoms of acute pericarditis are chest pain and fever (Table 14-3). The
pain may be severe and usually localizes to the retrosternal area and left precordium; it may
also radiate to the back and to the ridge of the left trapezius muscle. What differentiates it
from myocardial ischemia or infarction is that the pain of pericarditis is typically sharp, pleu-
ritic (it is aggravated by inspiration and coughing), and positional (e.g., sitting and leaning
forward often lessen the discomfort). Dyspnea is common during acute pericarditis but is not
exertional and probably results from a reluctance of the patient to breathe deeply because of
pleuritic pain.

Patients with idiopathic or viral pericarditis are typically young and previously healthy.
Pericarditis of other causes should be suspected in patients with the underlying conditions
listed in Table 14-1 who develop the typical sharp, pleuritic chest pains and fever.

Physical Examination
A scratchy pericardial friction rub is common in acute pericarditis and is believed to be pro-
duced by the movement of the inflamed pericardial layers against one another. Auscultation
of the rub is best heard using the diaphragm of the stethoscope with the patient leaning for-
ward while exhaling (which brings the pericardium closer to the chest wall and stethoscope).
In its full form, the rub consists of three components, corresponding to the phases of great-
est cardiac movement: ventricular contraction, ventricular relaxation, and atrial contraction.
Characteristically, the pericardial rub is evanescent, coming and going from one examination
to the next.

Diagnostic Studies
The presence of pleuritic, positional chest pain and the characteristic pericardial friction rub
implicate the presence of acute pericarditis. However, certain laboratory studies are helpful to
conf rm the diagnosis and to assess for impending complications.

The electrocardiogram (ECG) is abnormal in 90% of patients with acute pericarditis and
helps to distinguish it from other forms of cardiac disease, such as an acute coronary syn-
drome. The most important ECG pattern, which reflects inflammation of the adjacent myo-
cardium, consists of diffuse ST-segment elevation in most of the ECG leads, usually with the
exception of aVR and V1 (Fig. 14-1). In addition, PR-segment depression in several leads is
often evident, reflecting abnormal atrial repolarization related to atrial epicardial inflamma-
tion. These abnormalities are in contrast to the ECG of acute ST-segment elevation MI, in
which the ST segments are elevated only in the leads overlying the region of infarction, and
PR depression is not expected.

Blood studies typically reveal signs of acute inflammation, including an increased white
blood cell count (usually a mild lymphocytosis in acute viral/idiopathic pericarditis) and
Diseases of the Pericardium 339
Peritittetitsiritrrrtsit ty y | y t etstitirtitiiitittitiitititit settee Prtitittirisrriitistittti tie titssel
Te enn nian
fe
ie faa aie | ee AEN yet | ee

bad [EEE SHE aTEHTEE| PEHUEY (ESE EEE

HGURE 14-1. Hectrocardiogram in acute pericarditis. Diffuse SI-segment elevation is present. Also notice
depression of the PRsegment (arrow).
elevation of serum inflammatory markers (e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive
protein). Some patients with acute pericarditis also demonstrate elevated serum cardiac bio-
markers (e.g., cardiac troponins), suggesting inflammation of the neighboring myocardium.

Further testing in acute pericarditis often includes echocardiography to evaluate for the pres-
ence and hemodynamic signif cance of a pericardial effusion. Additional studies that may be
useful in individual cases to def ne the cause of pericarditis include (1) purif ed protein deriva-
tive skin test for tuberculosis, (2) serologic tests (antinuclear antibodies and rheumatoid fac-
tor) to screen for connective tissue diseases, and (3) a careful search for malignancy, especially
of the lung and breast (physical examination supplemented by chest radiography and mam-
mography). The yield of diagnostic pericardiocentesis (removal of pericardial fluid through a
needle) in uncomplicated acute pericarditis is low and should be reserved for patients with
very large effusions or evidence of cardiac chamber compression, as described below.

Treatment

Idiopathic or viral pericarditis is a self-limited disease that usually runs its course in | to
3 weeks. Management consists of rest, to reduce the interaction of the inflamed pericardial
layers, and pain relief by analgesic and anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin, ibuprofen, and other
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents). Colchicine, a drug with anti-inflammatory properties
usually used to treat gout, may be useful as an additional agent in acute pericarditis. It has
been shown to decrease the recurrence rate after an initial episode. Oral corticosteroids are
effective for severe or recurrent pericardial pain but should not be used in uncomplicated
cases because of potentially signif cant side effects and because steroid use is associated with
an increased rate of recurrent episodes of pericarditis.

The forms of pericarditis related to MI are treated in a similar fashion, with rest and aspi-
rin. Other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are often avoided immediately following an
MI because of experimental evidence linking them to delayed healing of the infarct.

Purulent pericarditis requires more aggressive treatment, including catheter drainage of
the pericardium and intensive antibiotic therapy. Nevertheless, even with such therapy, the
mortality rate is very high. Tuberculous pericarditis requires prolonged multidrug antituber-
culous therapy. Pericarditis in the setting of uremia often resolves following intensive dialysis.
Neoplastic pericardial disease usually indicates widely metastatic cancer, and therapy is
unfortunately only palliative.
340 (chapter 14

PERICARDIAL EFFUSION

Etiology
The normal pericardial space contains 15 to 50 mL of pericardial fluid, a plasma ultraf Itrate
secreted by the mesothelial cells that line the serosal layer. A larger volume of fluid may accu-
mulate in association with any of the forms of acute pericarditis previously described.

In addition, noninflammatory serous effusions may result from conditions of (1) increased
capillary permeability (e.g., severe hypothyroidism), (2) increased capillary hydrostatic pres-
sure (e.g., congestive heart failure), or (3) decreased plasma oncotic pressure (e.g., cirrhosis or
the nephrotic syndrome). Chylous effusions may occur in the presence of lymphatic obstruc-
tion of pericardial drainage, most commonly caused by neoplasms and tuberculosis.

Pathophysiology

Because the pericardium is a relatively stiff structure, the relationship between its internal
volume and pressure is not linear, as shown in curve A in Figure 14-2. Notice that the initial
portion of the curve is nearly flat, indicating that at the low volumes normally present within
the pericardium, a small increase in volume leads to only a small rise in pressure. However,
when the intrapericardial volume expands beyond a critical level (see Fig. 14-2, arrow), a
dramatic increase in pressure is incited by the nondistensible sac. At that point, even a minor
increase in volume can translate into an enormous compressive force on the heart.

Three factors determine whether a pericardial effusion remains clinically silent or whether
symptoms of cardiac compression ensue: (1) the volume of fluid, (2) the rate at which the
fluid accumulates, and (3) the compliance characteristics of the pericardium.

A sudden increase of pericardial volume, as may occur in chest trauma with intraperi-
cardial hemorrhage, results in marked elevation of pericardial pressure (see Fig. 14-2, steep
portion of curve A) and the potential for severe cardiac chamber compression. Even lesser
amounts of fluid may cause signif cant elevation of pressure if the pericardium is pathologically

20

A B
10
0
100 200 300 400 500 600
Total pericardial volume (mL)

HGURE14-2. Schematic representation of the volume—pressure relationship of normal pericardium.
A. At the very lowest levels, a small rise in volume results in a small rise in pressure. However, when the
limits of pericardial stretch are reached (arrow), the curve becomes very steep, and a further small rise in
intrapericardial volume results in signif cantly increased pressure. B Chronic slow accumulation of volume
allows the pericardium to gradually stretch over time; thus, the curve shifts to the right and much larger
volumes are accommodated at lower pressures. (Mbdif ed from Freeman GL, le Winter MM Pericardial
adaptations during chronic dilation in dogs. Gre Res. 1984;54:294.)
Diseases of the Pericardium 341

TABLE 14-4

Soft heart sounds

Reduced intensity of friction rub

Ewart sign (dullness over posterior left lung)
st
noncompliant and stiff, as may occur in the presence of tumor or fbrosis of the sac. In
contrast, if the pericardial effusion accumulates slowly, over weeks to months, the pericar-
dium gradually stretches, such that the volume-pressure relationship curve shifts toward the
right (see Fig. 14-2, curve B). With this adaptation, the pericardium can accommodate larger
volumes without marked elevation of intrapericardial pressure.

Cinical Features

A spectrum of possible symptoms is associated with pericardial effusions. For example, the
patient with a large effusion may be asymptomatic, may complain of a dull constant ache in
the left side of the chest, or may present with fndings of cardiac tamponade, as described
later in the chapter. In addition, the effusion may cause symptoms resulting from compres-
sion of adjacent structures, such as dysphagia (diff culty swallowing because of esophageal
compression), dyspnea (shortness of breath resulting from lung compression), hoarseness
(due to recurrent laryngeal nerve compression), or hiccups (resulting from phrenic nerve
stimulation).

On examination (Table 14-4), a large pericardial fluid “insulates” the heart from the chest
wall, and the heart sounds may be muffled. In fact, a friction rub that had been present dur-
ing the acute phase of pericarditis may disappear if a large effusion develops and separates
the inflamed layers from one another. Dullness to percussion of the left lung over the angle
of the scapula may be present (known as the Ewart sign) owing to compressive atelectasis by
the enlarged pericardial sac.

Diagnostic Studies

The chest radiograph may be normal if only a small pericardial effusion is present.
However, if more than approximately 250 mL has accumulated, the cardiac silhouette
enlarges in a globular, symmetric fashion. In large effusions, the ECG may demonstrate
reduced voltage of the complexes. In the presence of very large effusions, the height of
the QRS complex may vary from beat to beat (electrical alternans), a result of a constantly
changing electrical axis as the heart swings from side to side within the large pericardial
volume (Fig. 14-3).

igs Hg ESSSa FSGH) RESRG Sama NERY PEERS FEESH ESET ESSE GFESS EBT HH SESH
Eelam ut ne ene ert eaten err cn
HGURE 14-3. Hectrical alternans. Rhythm strip of lead VI showing alternating height of the QRS complex
from beat to beat, due to shifting of the cardiac axis as the heart swings within a large pericardial effusion.
342 chapter 14
One of the most useful laboratory tests
in the evaluation of an effusion is echocar- "
diography (Fig. 14-4), which can identify 5 .
pericardial collections as small as 20 mL. 2
This noninvasive technique can quantify : =
the volume of pericardial fluid, determine
whether ventricular f lling is compromised, * “rv 4
and when necessary, help direct the place- PE Pa
ment of a pericardiocentesis needle. :
Treatment =
If the cause of the effusion is known, |
therapy is directed toward the underlying '
disorder (e.g., intensive dialysis for ure-
. . . . HGURE 14-4. Two-dimensional echocardiogram
mic effusion). If the cause is not evident, . 4
_ ; . (parastemal short-axis view) of a pericardial
the clinical state of the patient determines effusion (PE) surrounding the heart. LV left
whether pericardiocentesis (removal of ventricle.
pericardial fluid) should be undertaken.
An asymptomatic effusion, even of large volume, can be observed for long periods without
specif c intervention. However, if serial examination demonstrates a precipitous rise in peri-
cardial volume or if hemodynamic compression of the cardiac chambers becomes evident,
then pericardiocentesis should be performed for therapeutic drainage and for analysis of
the fluid.
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
At the opposite end of the spectrum from the asymptomatic pericardial effusion is cardiac
tamponade. In this condition, pericardial fluid accumulates under high pressure, compresses
the cardiac chambers, and severely limits flling of the heart. As a result, ventricular stroke
volume and cardiac output decline, potentially leading to hypotensive shock and death.
Etiology
Any etiology of acute pericarditis (see Table 14-1) can progress to cardiac tamponade, but
the most common causes are neoplastic, postviral, and uremic pericarditis. Acute hemor-
rhage into the pericardium is also an important cause of tamponade, which can result
(1) from blunt or penetrating chest trauma, (2) from rupture of the left ventricular (LV) free
wall following MI (see Chapter 7), or (3) as a complication of a dissecting aortic aneurysm
(see Chapter 15).
Pathophysiology
As a result of the surrounding tense pericardial fluid, the heart is compressed, and the dia-
stolic pressure within each chamber becomes elevated and equal to the pericardial pressure.
The pathophysiologic consequences of this are illustrated in Figure 14-5. Because the com-
promised cardiac chambers cannot accommodate normal venous return, the systemic and
pulmonary venous pressures rise. The increase of systemic venous pressure results in signs
of right-sided heart failure (e.g., jugular venous distention), whereas elevated pulmonary
venous pressure leads to pulmonary congestion. In addition, reduced f lling of the ventricles
during diastole decreases the systolic stroke volume, and the cardiac output declines.
Diseases of the Pericardium 343
Pericardial fluid under Scarred, rigid
pressure pericardium
HGURE 14-5. Pathophysiology of cardiac tamponade and constrictive pericarditis. The symptoms and
signs (orange boxes) arise from impaired diastolic fling of the ventricles in both conditions.

These derangements trigger compensatory mechanisms aimed at maintaining tissue perfu-
sion, initially through activation of the sympathetic nervous system (e.g., increased heart rate
and contractility). Nonetheless, failure to evacuate the effusion leads to inadequate perfusion
of vital organs, shock, and ultimately death.

Cinical Features

Cardiac tamponade should be suspected in any patient with known pericarditis, pericardial
effusion, or chest trauma who develops signs and symptoms of systemic vascular congestion
and decreased cardiac output (Table 14-5). The key physical fndings include (1) jugular
venous distention, (2) systemic hypotension, and (3) a “small, quiet heart” on physical exam-
ination, a result of the insulating effects of the effusion. Other signs include sinus tachycardia
and pulsus paradoxus (described later). Dyspnea and tachypnea reflect pulmonary conges-
tion and decreased oxygen delivery to peripheral tissues.

If tamponade develops suddenly, symptoms of profound hypotension are evident, includ-
ing confusion and agitation. However, if the effusion develops more slowly, over a period of
weeks, then fatigue (caused by low cardiac output) and peripheral edema (owing to right-
sided heart failure) may be the presenting complaints.

TABLE 14-5

Jugular venous distention

Hypotension with pulsus paradoxus

Quiet precordium on palpation

Sinus tachycardia
ee
344 (Chapter 14
ee

BOX 14-1 Measurement of Pulsus Paradoxus at the Bedside

Pulsus paradoxus is an exaggeration of the normal decline in systolic blood pressure that occurs

with inspiration. It can be measured at the bedside using a manual sphygmomanometer. Hrst,

inf ate the sphygmomanometer to a level greater than the patient’s systolic pressure. As the cuff is

slowly def ated, carefully listen for the appearance of the first Korotkoff sounds. This level marks the

maximum systolic pressure and occurs during expiration. If the pressure is held at that level (i.e.,

if you stop def ating the cuff) in a patient with pulsus paradoxus, the Korotkoff sounds will drift in

and out, audible with expiration, and absent with inspiration. That is, the systolic pressure will fall

during inspiration to a level below the cuff’s pressure and no sound will be heard during that time.

Next, slowly def ate the cuff and continue listening. When the cuff pressure falls to the level just

below the patient’s systolic pressure during inspiration, the Korotkoff sounds stop drifting in and

out (i.e., they are audible during both inspiration and expiration). Pulsus paradoxus is calculated as

the difference between the initial systolic pressure (when the intermittent Korotkoff sounds are first

heard) and this pressure (when the sounds are first audible throughout the respiratory cycle). In the
presence of cardiac tamponade, this pressure difference is greater than 10 mm Hg.

Pulsus paradoxus is an important physical sign in cardiac tamponade that can be recog-
nized at the bedside using a standard blood pressure cuff. It refers to a decrease of systolic
blood pressure (more than 10 mm Hg) during normal inspiration (see Box 14-1).

Pulsus paradoxus is not really “paradoxical”; it is just an exaggeration of appropriate car-
diac physiology. Normally, expansion of the thorax during inspiration causes the intrathoracic
pressure to become more negative compared with the expiratory phase. This facilitates sys-
temic venous return to the chest and augments f lling of the right ventricle (RV). The transient
increase in RV size shifts the interventricular septum toward the left, which diminishes LV
f lling. As a result, in normal persons, LV stroke volume and systolic blood pressure decline
slightly following inspiration.

In cardiac tamponade, this situation is exaggerated because both ventricles share a reduced,
f xed volume as a result of external compression by the tense pericardial fluid. In this case, the
inspiratory increase of RV volume and bulging of the interventricular septum toward the left
have a proportionally greater effect on the limitation of LV f Iling. Thus, in tamponade, there
is a more substantial reduction of LV stroke volume (and therefore systolic blood pressure)
following inspiration.

Pulsus paradoxus may also be manifested by other conditions in which inspiration is exag-
gerated, including severe asthma and chronic obstructive airway disease.

Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography is the most useful noninvasive technique to evaluate whether pericardial effu-
sion has led to cardiac tamponade physiology. An important indicator of high-pressure pericar-
dial fluid is compression of the RV and right atrium during diastole (see Fig. 3-12). In addition,
echocardiography can differentiate between cardiac tamponade and other causes of low cardiac
output, such as ventricular contractile dysfunction. The def nitive diagnostic procedure for car-
diac tamponade is cardiac catheterization with measurement of intracardiac and intrapericardial
pressures, usually combined with therapeutic pericardiocentesis, as described in the next section.

Treatment
Removal of the high-pressure pericardial fluid is the only intervention that reverses the life-
threatening physiology of this condition. Pericardiocentesis is best performed in the cardiac
catheterization laboratory, where the hemodynamic effect of fluid removal can be assessed.
The patient is positioned head up at a 45-degree angle to promote pooling of the effusion, and
Diseases of the Pericardium 345

ECG A a needle is inserted into the pericardial space through

the skin, usually just below the xiphoid process (which

is the safest location to avoid piercing a coronary

A artery). A catheter is then threaded into the pericar-

Normal I\ dial space and connected to a transducer for pressure

x | \ measurement. Another catheter is threaded through a

systemic vein into the right side of the heart, and simul-

taneous recordings of intracardiac and intrapericardial

B a pressures are compared. In tamponade, the pericardial

vi pressure is elevated and is equal to the diastolic pres-

samponade /\ /— sures within all of the cardiac chambers, reflecting the
compressive force of the surrounding effusion.

In addition, the right atrial pressure tracing,
oom i K— which is equivalent to the jugular venous pulsation
Cc observed on physical examination, displays a charac-

. y teristic abnormality (Fig. 14-6). During early diastole
Constrictive I .

pericarditis NN | in a normal person, as the RV pressure falls and the

tricuspid valve opens, blood quickly flows from the

right atrium into the RV, leading to a rapid decline in

I the right atrial pressure (the y descent). In tampon-

Tricus pid ade, however, the pericardial fluid compresses the
valve RV and prevents its rapid expansion. Thus, the right
opens . . .
atrium cannot empty quickly, and the y descent is
HGURE 14-6. Schematic diagrams of right atrial(or blunted.
jugular venous) pressure recordings. A. Normal. ‘The Following successful pericardiocentesis, the pericar-
initial a wave represents atrial contraction. The v wave dial pressure falls to normal and is no longer equal to
ref ects passive filling of the atrium during systole, P . wae 7 4 .
when the tricuspid valve is closed. After the tricuspid the diastolic pressures within the heart chambers, which
valve opens, the right atrial pressure falls (y descent) also decline to their appropriate levels. After initial aspi-
as blood empties into the right ventricle. B. Cardiac ration of fluid, the pericardial catheter may be left in
tamponade. High-pressure pericardial f uid compresses place for 1 to 2 days to allow more complete drainage.
the heart, impairing right ventricular filling, so that When pericardial fluid is obtained for diagnostic
the y descent is blunted. C Constrictive pericarditis. purposes, it should be stained and cultured for bac-
The earliest phase of diastolic filling is not impaired teria, fungi, and acid-fast bacilli (tuberculosis), and
so that the y descent is not blunted. The y descent . ae
appears accentuated because it descends from a cytologic examination should be performed to evalu-
higher-than-normal right atrial pressure. The right ate for malignancy. Other common measurements of
atrial c wave (described in Chapter 2) is not shown. pericardial fluid include cell counts (e.g., white cell
count is elevated in bacterial infections and other
inflammatory conditions) and protein and lactate dehydrogenase levels. If the concentration
ratio of pericardial protein to serum protein is greater than 0.5, or that of pericardial LDH to
serum LDH is greater than 0.6, then the fluid is consistent with an exudate; otherwise, it is
more likely a transudate. When tuberculosis is suspected, it is also useful to measure the level
of adenosine deaminase in the pericardial fluid. Studies have indicated that an elevated level
is highly sensitive and specif c for tuberculosis.
If cardiac tamponade recurs following pericardiocentesis, the procedure can be repeated.
In some cases, a more def nitive surgical undertaking (removal of part or all of the pericar-
dium) is required to prevent reaccumulation of the effusion.
CONSTRICITVE PERICARDITIS
The other major potential complication of pericardial diseases is constrictive pericarditis.
This is a condition not frequently encountered but is important to understand, because it can
masquerade as other more common disorders. In addition, it is an affliction that may cause
profound symptoms yet is often fully correctable if recognized.
346 Chapter 14

Etiology and Pathogenesis
In the early part of the 20th century, tuberculosis was the major cause of constrictive peri-
carditis but that is much less common today in industrialized societies. The most frequent
cause now is “idiopathic” (i.e., months to years following presumed idiopathic or viral acute
pericarditis). However, any etiology of pericarditis can lead to this complication, including
prior radiation therapy to the left side of the chest.

Pathology
Following an episode of acute pericarditis, any pericardial effusion that has accumulated
usually undergoes gradual resorption. However, in patients who later develop constrictive
pericarditis, the fluid undergoes organization, with subsequent fusion of the pericardial lay-
ers, followed by f brous scar formation. In some patients, calcif cation of the adherent layers
ensues, further stiffening the pericardium.

Pathophysiology
The pathophysiologic abnormalities in constrictive pericarditis occur during diastole; systolic
contraction of the ventricles is usually normal. In this condition, a rigid, scarred pericardium
encircles the heart and inhibits normal f lling of the cardiac chambers. For example, as blood
passes from the right atrium into the RV during diastole, the RV size expands and quickly
reaches the limit imposed by the constricting pericardium. At that point, further f lling is sud-
denly arrested, and venous return to the right heart ceases. Thus, systemic venous pressure
rises, and signs of right-sided heart failure ensue. In addition, the impaired f lling of the left
ventricle causes a reduction in stroke volume and cardiac output, which leads to lower blood
pressure.

Cinical Features
The symptoms and signs of constrictive pericarditis usually develop over months to years.
They result from (1) reduced cardiac output (fatigue, hypotension, and reflex tachycardia)
and (2) elevated systemic venous pressures (jugular venous distention, hepatomegaly with
ascites, and peripheral edema). Because the most impressive physical f ndings are often the
insidious development of hepatomegaly and ascites, patients may be mistakenly suspected
of having hepatic cirrhosis or an intra-abdominal tumor. However, careful inspection of the
elevated jugular veins can point to the correct diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis.

On cardiac examination, an early diastolic “knock” may follow the second heart in patients
with severe calcif c constriction. It represents the sudden cessation of ventricular diastolic f Il-
ing imposed by the rigid pericardial sac.

In contrast to cardiac tamponade, pericardial constriction results in pulsus paradoxus
less frequently. Recall that in tamponade, this fnding reflects inspiratory augmentation
of RV flling, at the expense of LV flling. However, in constrictive pericarditis, the nega-
tive intrathoracic pressure generated by inspiration is not easily transmitted through the
rigid pericardial shell to the right-sided heart chambers; therefore, inspiratory augmenta-
tion of RV flling is more limited. Rather, when a patient with severe pericardial constric-
tion inhales, the negative intrathoracic pressure draws blood toward the thorax, where it
cannot be accommodated by the constricted right-sided cardiac chambers. As a result, the
increased venous return accumulates in the intrathoracic systemic veins, causing the jugular
veins to become more distended during inspiration (Kussmaul sign). This is the opposite
of normal physiology, in which inspiration results in a decline in jugular venous pressure,
Diseases of the Pericardium 347
as venous return is drawn into the heart. Thus, typical f ndings in pericardial disease can
be summarized as follows:

QOonstrictive Pericarditis Cardiac Tamponade
Pulsus paradoxus + +++
Kussmaul sign +++ —
sss
Diagnostic Studies

The chest radiograph in constrictive pericarditis shows a normal or mildly enlarged cardiac

silhouette. Calcif cation of the pericardium can be detected in some patients with severe

chronic constriction. The ECG generally shows nonspecifc ST and T-wave abnormalities;
atrial arrhythmias are common.

Echocardiographic evidence of constriction is subtle. The pericardium, if well imaged, is thick-
ened. The ventricular cavities are small and contract vigorously, but ventricular f lling terminates
abruptly in early diastole, as the chambers reach the limit imposed by the surrounding rigid shell.
Aberrant diastolic motion of the interventricular septum, and alterations of LV inflow velocities
during respiration assessed by Doppler, also reflect the abnormal pattern of diastolic f lling.

Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging is superior to echocardiography in the
assessment of pericardial anatomy and thickness. The presence of normal pericardial thickness
(less than 2 mm) by these modalities makes constrictive pericarditis a much less likely diagnosis.

The diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis can be confrmed by cardiac catheterization,
which reveals four key features:

1. Elevation and equalization of the diastolic pressures in each of the cardiac chambers.

2. An early diastolic “dip and plateau” conf guration in the RV and LV tracings (Fig. 14-7).
This pattern reflects blood flow into the ventricles at the very onset of diastole, just after the
tricuspid and mitral valves open, followed by sudden cessation of fIling as further expan-
sion of the ventricles is arrested by the surrounding rigid pericardium.

ECG | A ECG A N
100 100

LV

so, lV 80

60 60

RV
40 RV 40
Plateau
20 20 J
Early diastolic
filling wave
Time Time

A B

HGURE14-7. Schematic tracings of left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) pressures in a

normal heart (A) and in constrictive pericarditis (B). In the latter situation, early diastolic ventricular

flling abruptly halts as the volume in each ventricle quickly reaches the limit imposed by the constricting
pericardium. Throughout most of diastole, the LVand RVpressures are abnormally elevated and equal.
348 chapter 14

3. A prominent y descent in the right atrial pressure tracing (see Fig. 14-6). After the tricuspid
valve opens, the right atrium quickly empties into the RV (and its pressure rapidly falls)
during the very brief period before f lling is arrested. This is in contrast to cardiac tampon-
ade, in which the external compressive force throughout the cardiac cycle prevents rapid
ventricular f lling, even in early diastole, such that the y descent is blunted.

4. During the respiratory cycle, there is discordance in the RV and LV systolic pressures (the
RV systolic pressure rises with inspiration, while that of the LV declines). This is explained
as follows: in normal persons, the negative intrathoracic pressure induced by inspiration
causes the systolic pressure of both ventricles to decline slightly. In contrast, in constrictive
pericarditis, the heart is isolated from the rest of the thorax by the surrounding rigid shell.
In this circumstance, negative intrathoracic pressure induced by inspiration decreases the
pressure in the pulmonary veins but not in the left-sided cardiac chambers. This causes a
decline in the pressure gradient driving blood back to the left side of the heart from the pul-
monary veins, such that left ventricle flling is diminished. Less ventricular f lling reduces
the stroke volume and results in a lower LV systolic pressure (and is the likely mechanism of
pulsus paradoxus in some patients with constrictive pericarditis). Simultaneously, because
the two ventricles share a f xed space limited by the rigid pericardium, the reduced LV
volume allows the interventricular septum to shift toward the left, which enlarges the RV
(this reciprocal behavior is termed ventricular interdependence). The subsequent increase
in RV f lling augments systolic pressure during inspiration. During expiration, the situation
is reversed, with the RV systolic pressure declining and that of the LV increasing.

The clinical and hemodynamic f ndings of constrictive pericarditis are often similar to those
of restrictive cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 10), another uncommon condition. Distinguishing
between these two syndromes is important because pericardial constriction is often correct-
able, whereas most cases of restrictive cardiomyopathy have very limited effective treatments
(Table 14-6). An endomyocardial biopsy is sometimes necessary to distinguish between these
(the biopsy results are normal in constriction but usually abnormal in restrictive cardiomy-
opathy; see Chapter 10).

Feature Qonstrictive Pericarditis Restrictive Gardiomyopathy

Chest radiography

Pericardial calcif cations Yes (25%-30% of patients) Absent

CT or MRI

° Thickened pericardium Yes No

Echocardiography

° Thickened pericardium Yes (but diff cult to visualize) No

° Respiratory cycle effect on Exaggerated variations Normal
transvalvular Doppler velocities

Cardiac catheterization

° Equalized LVand RV diastolic Yes Often, LV> RV
pressures

* Hevated PA systolic pressure Uncommon @mmon

* Effect of inspiration on systolic Discordant : LV|, RVf Qncordant: LV], RV|
pressures

Endomyocardial biopsy Normal Abnormal (e.g., amyloid)

a

CT, computed tomography; LV left ventricle; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PA, pulmonary artery; RV right

ventricle.
Diseases of the Pericardium 349
Treatment

The only effective treatment of severe constrictive pericarditis is surgical removal of the
pericardium. Symptoms and signs of constriction may not resolve immediately after surgery
because of the associated stiffness of the neighboring outer walls of the heart, but subsequent
clinical improvement is the rule in patients with otherwise intact cardiac function. The degree
of improvement depends on the underlying etiology, with the most favorable outcomes in
patients with an idiopathic/ post—viral pericarditis origin, and the least favorable benef t when
prior radiation therapy is the cause.

° Acute pericarditis is characterized by three stages: (1) local vasodilation with transu-
dation of protein-poor, cell-free fluid into the pericardial space; (2) increased vascular
permeability, with leak of protein into the pericardial space; and (3) leukocyte exudation,
initially by neutrophils, followed later by mononuclear cells.

e Acute pericarditis is most often of idiopathic or viral cause and is usually a self-limited
illness.

* Common clinical f ndings in acute pericarditis include pleuritic chest pain, fever, pericardial
friction rub, and diffuse ST-segment elevation on the ECG, often accompanied by PR-segment
depression.

° Treatment of common acute pericarditis (1.e., viral or idiopathic pericarditis) consists of a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; the addition of colchicine may reduce the frequency of
recurrences and shorten the duration of the acute illness.

° Glucocorticoid drugs should not be used as initial therapy for acute pericarditis as they
increase the likelihood of recurrences.

¢ Complications of pericarditis include cardiac tamponade (accumulation of pericardial fluid
under high pressure, which compresses the cardiac chambers) and constrictive pericarditis
(restricted f lling of the heart because of the surrounding rigid pericardium).

e Distinguishing between constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy is important
because pericardial constriction is often correctable with surgical removal of the pericardium,
whereas most cases of restrictive cardiomyopathy have very limited effective treatments.

Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Yin Ren, MD; Yanerys Ramos, MD;
Thomas G. Roberts, MD; Angela Fowler, MD; Kathy Glatter, MD; and Alan Braverman, MD.
Additional Reading
ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines. Guidelines on the diag- | Klein AL, Abbara S, Agler DA, et al. American Society of
nosis and management of pericardial diseases, executive Echocardiography clinical recommendations for multimo-
summary. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:587—-610. dality cardiovascular imaging of patients with pericardial
Herzog E, ed. Management of Pericardial Disease. London, UK: disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2013;26:965—1012.
Springer-Verlag; 2014. Lilly LS. Treatment of acute and recurrent idiopathic pericardi-
Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, et al. A randomized trial of colchi- tis. Circulation. 2013;127:1723—1726.
cine for acute pericarditis. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1522-1528. Shabetai R. The Pericardium. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic;
Khandaker MH, Espinosa RE, Nishimura RA, et al. Pericardial 2003.
disease: diagnosis and management. Mayo Clin Proc.
2010;85:572—593.
.
i i
Diseases of the Ve
5 | a
Peripheral Vasculature |. |
—_-
Sruthi Renati
Mark A. Creager
——
Chapter Outline P eripheral vascular disease is an umbrella term that includes
—==——Es= a number of diverse pathologic entities that affect arteries,
Diseases of the Aorta veins, and lymphatics. Although this terminology makes a dis-
Aortic Aneurysms a 5
Aortic Dissection tinction between the “central” coronary and “peripheral” sys-
Peripheral Artery Diseases temic vessels, the vasculature as a whole comprises a dynamic,
Peripheral Atherosclerotic integrated, and multifunctional organ system that does not
Vascular Disease naturally comply with this semantic division.
Acute Arterial Occlusion Blood vessels serve many critical functions. Hirst, they
Vasculitic Syndromes regulate the differential distribution of blood and delivery
Vasospasm: Raynaud ; .
Phenomenon of nutrients and oxygen to tissues. Second, blood vessels
ReToue TRSCate actively synthesize and secrete vasoactive substances that
Varicose Veins regulate vascular tone, and antithrombotic substances that
Chronic Venous Insufficiency maintain the fuidity of blood and vessel patency (see Chap-
transport and distribution of immune cells to traumatized or
infected tissues. Disease states of the peripheral vasculature
interfere with these essential functions.

Peripheral vascular diseases result from processes that can
be grouped into three categories: (1) structural changes in the
vessel wall secondary to degenerative conditions, infection,
or infammation that lead to dilatation, aneurysm, dissec-
tion, or rupture; (2) narrowing of the vascular lumen caused
by atherosclerosis, thrombosis, or infammation; and (3)
‘spasm of vascular smooth muscle. These processes can occur

350
