¥ , =
a
t,
Acute Coronary :
=
Syndromes |. -
Jayme Wilder
Marc S. Sabatine
Leonard S. Lilly -
——
Chapter Outline A cute coronary syndromes (ACSs) are life-threatening con-
a ditions that can punctuate the course of patients with
ees of Acute Coronary coronary artery disease at any time. These syndromes form a
7 Hemostasis continuum that ranges from an unstable pattern of angina pec-
Endogenous Antithrombotic toris to the development of a large acute myocardial infarc-
Mechanisms tion (M), a condition of irreversible necrosis of heart muscle
Pathogenesis of Coronary Thrombosis (Table 7-1). All forms of ACS share a common initiating patho-
Nonatheroscierotic Causes oF physiologic mechanism, as this chapter examines.
ponte Mocardial Infarction The frequency of AGS is staggering: more than 1.4 mil-
Pathology and Pathophysiology ; . . . .
Pathologic-Evelution-ofinfarction lion people are admitted to hospitals in the United States
PauncoonalAlterarone each year with these conditions. Within the year after a frst
Cinical Features of Acute @ronary M, 19% of men and 26% of women will die. Despite these
Syndromes daunting statistics, mortality associated with AGS has actu-
Treatment of Acute Cbronary chapter considers the events that lead to an AG, the path-
Syndromes ologic and functional changes that follow, and therapeutic
Acute Treatment of Unstable approaches that ameliorate the aberrant pathophysiology.
Angina and Non—ST-Hevation
Myocardial Infarction
Acute Treatment of SHevation PATHOGENESIS OF ACUTE CORONARY
Myocardial Infarction SYNDROVES
Adjunctive Therapies
More than 90% of ACSs result from disruption of an ath-
erosclerotic plaque with subsequent platelet aggregation
and formation of an intracoronary thrombus. The throm-
—
Acute Goronary Syndromes 163
TABLE 7-1
Unstable Angina Non—SFHevation Mi SFHevation Mi
Usual coronary Partially occlusive Partially occlusive @mpletely occlusive
pathology thrombus thrombus thrombus
Myocyte necrosis No Yes Yes
a
M, myocardial infarction.
(NSTEMD), with the latter being distinguished from the former by the presence of myocardial
necrosis. At the other end of the spectrum, if the thrombus completely obstructs the coronary
artery, the results are more severe ischemia and a larger amount of necrosis, manifesting as
an ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).

The responsible thrombus in ACS is generated by interactions among the atherosclerotic plaque,
the coronary endothelium, circulating platelets, and the dynamic vasomotor tone of the vessel
wall, which overwhelm the natural antithrombotic mechanisms described in the next section.

Normal Hemostasis

When a normal blood vessel is injured, the endothelial surface becomes disrupted and throm-
bogenic connective tissue is exposed. Primary hemostasis is the frst line of defense against
bleeding. This process begins within seconds of vessel injury and is mediated by circulating
platelets, which adhere to collagen in the vascular subendothelium and aggregate to form a
“platelet plug.” While the primary hemostatic plug forms, the exposure of subendothelial tis-
sue factor triggers the plasma coagulation cascade, initiating the process of secondary hemo-
stasis. The plasma coagulation proteins involved in secondary hemostasis are sequentially
activated at the site of injury and ultimately form a fbrin clot by the action of thrombin. The
resulting clot stabilizes and strengthens the platelet plug.

The normal hemostatic system minimizes blood loss from injured vessels, but there is little
difference between this physiologic response and the pathologic process of coronary throm-
bosis triggered by disruption of atherosclerotic plaques.

Fndogenous Antithrombotic Mechanisms
Normal blood vessels, including the coronary arteries, are replete with safeguards that prevent
spontaneous thrombosis and occlusion, some examples of which are shown in Figure 7-1.
Inactivation of Cotting Factors
Several natural inhibitors tightly regulate the coagulation process to oppose clot formation
and maintain blood fluidity. The most important of these are antithrombin, proteins C and S,
and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI).

Antithrombin is a plasma protein that irreversibly binds to thrombin and other clotting fac-
tors, inactivating them and facilitating their clearance from the circulation (see mechanism 1
in Fig. 7-1). The effectiveness of antithrombin is increased 1,000-fold by binding to heparan
sulfate, a heparin-like molecule normally present on the luminal surface of endothelial cells.

Protein C, protein S, and thrombomodulin form a natural anticoagulant system that
inactivates the “acceleration” factors of the coagulation pathway (i.e., factors Va and VIIla).
Protein C is synthesized in the liver and circulates in an inactive form. Thrombomodulin is a
thrombin-binding receptor normally present on endothelial cells. Thrombin bound to throm-
bomodulin cannot convert f brinogen to fbrin (the fnal reaction in clot formation). Instead,
164 Chapter 7
(4) tPA
iV p Plasminogen
fo, \\
we @ Plasmin
TFPI
HGURE7-1. Endogenous protective
Protein S . Fibrin mechanisms against thrombosis and
Se Neville split vessel occlusion. (1) Inactivation of
factors products thrombin by antithrombin (AT), the
Protein C* effectiveness of which is enhanced by
T™ , (2) Gs) binding of AT to heparan sulfate. (2)
Thrombin ( Inhibits Prostacyclin Inactivation of clotting factors Va and
. Villa by activated protein C(protein
; Protein C tivation “—— an C), an action that is snhanewd by
protein S. Protein Cis activated by
Irreversible the thrombomodulin (TM)-thrombin
Thrombin a ae thrombin complex. (3) Inactivation of factor VII/
inhibition . .
; ; tissue factor complex by tissue factor
IN (1) Antithrombin WH pathway inhibitor (TFPI). (4) Lysis
Heparan of fbrin clots by tissue plasminogen
sulfate activator (tPA). (5) Inhibition of
a. platelet activation by prostacyclin and
nitric oxide (NO).
the thrombin—thrombomodulin complex activates protein C. Activated protein C degrades fac-
tors Va and VIIa (see mechanism 2 in Fig. 7-1), thereby inhibiting coagulation. The presence
of protein S in the circulation enhances the inhibitory function of protein C.

TFPI is a plasma serine protease inhibitor that is activated by coagulation factor Xa. The
combined factor Xa—TFPI binds to and inactivates the complex of tissue factor with factor VIa
that normally triggers the extrinsic coagulation pathway (see mechanism 3 in Fig. 7-1). Thus,
TFPI serves as a negative feedback inhibitor that interferes with coagulation.

Lysis of Hbrin Cots
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is a protein secreted by endothelial cells in response to
many triggers of clot formation. It cleaves the protein plasminogen to form active plasmin,
which in turn enzymatically degrades f brin clots (see mechanism 4 in Fig. 7-1). When tPA binds
to f brin in a forming clot, its ability to convert plasminogen to plasmin is greatly enhanced.
Fndogenous Platelet Inhibition and Vasodilatation
Prostacyclin is synthesized and secreted by endothelial cells (see mechanism 5 in Fig. 7-1),
as described in Chapter 6. Prostacyclin increases platelet levels of cyclic AMP and thereby
strongly inhibits platelet activation and aggregation. It also indirectly inhibits coagulation via
its potent vasodilating properties. Vasodilatation helps guard against thrombosis by augment-
ing blood flow (which minimizes contact between procoagulant factors) and by reducing
shear stress (an inducer of platelet activation).

Nitric oxide (NO) is similarly secreted by endothelial cells, as described in Chapter 6. It

acts locally to inhibit platelet activation, and it too serves as a potent vasodilator.
Acute Gronary Syndromes 165

Te

HIGURE7-2. Mechanisms of coronary thrombus formation. Factors that contribute to this process include

plaque disruption (e.g., rupture) and inappropriate vasoconstriction and loss of normal antithrombotic

defenses because of dysfunctional endothelium.

Pathogenesis of Coronary Thrombosis

Normally, the mechanisms shown in Figure 7-1 serve to prevent spontaneous intravascu-
lar thrombus formation. However, abnormalities associated with atherosclerotic lesions may
overwhelm these defenses and result in coronary thrombosis and vessel occlusion (Fig. 7-2).
Atherosclerosis contributes to thrombus formation by (1) plaque rupture, which exposes the
circulating blood elements to thrombogenic substances, and (2) endothelial dysfunction with
the loss of normal protective antithrombotic and vasodilatory properties.

Atherosclerotic plaque rupture is considered the major trigger of coronary thrombosis.
The underlying causes of plaque disruption are (1) chemical factors that destabilize athero-
sclerotic lesions and (2) physical stresses to which the lesions are subjected. As described
in Chapter 5, atherosclerotic plaques consist of a lipid-laden core surrounded by a fbrous
external cap. Substances released from inflammatory cells within the plaque can compromise
the integrity of the fbrous cap. For example, T lymphocytes release interferon-y (IFN-y),
which inhibits collagen synthesis by smooth muscle cells and thereby interferes with the
usual strength of the cap. Additionally, cells within atherosclerotic lesions produce enzymes
(e.g., metalloproteinases) that degrade the interstitial matrix, further compromising plaque
stability. A weakened or thin-capped plaque is subject to rupture, particularly in its “shoul-
der” region (the border with the normal arterial wall that is subjected to high circumferential
stress) either spontaneously or by physical forces, such as intraluminal blood pressure and
torsion from the beating myocardium.

ACSs sometimes occur in the setting of certain triggers, such as strenuous physical activ-
ity or emotional upset. The activation of the sympathetic nervous system in these situations
increases the blood pressure, heart rate, and force of ventricular contraction—actions that
may stress the atherosclerotic lesion, thereby causing the plaque to f ssure or rupture. In addi-
tion, MI is most likely to occur in the early morning hours. This observation may relate to the
tendency of key physiologic stressors (such as systolic blood pressure, blood viscosity, and
166 (Chapter 7
plasma epinephrine levels) to be most elevated at that time of day, and these factors subject
vulnerable plaques to rupture.

While rupture of the f brous cap is responsible for the majority of ACSs, superf cial erosion
without rupture is a less common, important mechanism of plaque disruption and thrombus
formation. Eroded plaques often do not have a substantial lipid burden but have been associ-
ated with smoking and are also frequently found to be the cause of ACS in premenopausal
women.

Following plaque disruption, thrombus formation is provoked via mechanisms shown in
Figure 7-2. For example, during plaque rupture, the exposure of tissue factor from the ath-
eromatous core triggers the coagulation pathway, while subendothelial collagen activates
platelets. Activated platelets release the contents of their granules, which include facilitators
of platelet aggregation (e.g., adenosine diphosphate [ADP] and fbrinogen), activators of the
coagulation cascade (e.g., factor Va), and vasoconstrictors (e.g., thromboxane and serotonin).
The developing intracoronary thrombus, intraplaque hemorrhage, and vasoconstriction all
contribute to narrowing the vessel lumen, creating turbulent blood flow that contributes to
shear stress and further platelet activation.

Dysfunctional endothelium, which is apparent even in mild atherosclerotic coronary
disease, also increases the likelihood of thrombus formation. In the setting of endothelial
dysfunction, reduced amounts of vasodilators (e.g., NO and prostacyclin) are released and
inhibition of platelet aggregation by these factors is impaired, resulting in the loss of a key
defense against thrombosis.

Not only is dysfunctional endothelium less equipped to prevent platelet aggregation but
also is less able to counteract the vasoconstricting products of platelets. During thrombus
formation, vasoconstriction is promoted both by platelet products (thromboxane and sero-
tonin) and by thrombin within the developing clot. The normal platelet-associated vascular
response is vasodilatation, because platelet products stimulate endothelial NO and prostacy-
clin release, the influences of which predominate over direct platelet-derived vasoconstrictors
(see Fig. 6-4). However, reduced secretion of endothelial vasodilators in atherosclerosis allows
vasoconstriction to proceed unchecked. Similarly, thrombin in a forming clot is a potent vas-
cular smooth muscle constrictor in the setting of dysfunctional endothelium. Vasoconstriction
causes torsional stresses that can contribute to plaque rupture or can transiently occlude the
stenotic vessel through heightened arterial tone. The reduction in coronary blood flow caused
by vasoconstriction also reduces the washout of coagulation proteins, thereby enhancing
thrombogenicity.

Signif cance of @ronary Thrombosis
The formation of an intracoronary thrombus results in one of the several potential outcomes
(Fig. 7-3). For example, plaque rupture is sometimes superf cial, minor, and self-limited,
such that only a small, nonocclusive thrombus forms. In this case, the thrombus may simply
become incorporated into the growing atheromatous lesion through f brotic organization, or
it may be lysed by natural f brinolytic mechanisms. Recurrent asymptomatic plaque ruptures
of this type may cause gradual progressive enlargement of the coronary stenosis.

However, deeper plaque rupture may result in greater exposure of subendothelial collagen
and tissue factor, with formation of a larger thrombus that more substantially occludes the
vessel’s lumen. Such obstruction may cause prolonged severe ischemia and the develop-
ment of an ACS. If the intraluminal thrombus at the site of plaque disruption totally occludes
the vessel, blood flow beyond the obstruction will cease, prolonged ischemia will occur,
and an MI (usually an ST-elevation MI) will result. Conversely, if the thrombus partially
occludes the vessel (or if it totally occludes the vessel but only transiently because of spon-
taneous recanalization or by relief of superimposed vasospasm), the severity and duration of
te Coronary Syndromes 167
(With prolonged
ischemia)
(With transient
+ Serum
—Serum | +Serum biomarkers
| pucictigees | biomarkers | biomarkers
HGURE7-3. Gnsequences of coronary thrombosis. A small thrombus formed on superficial plaque rupture
may not result in symptoms or electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities, but healing and fibrous organization
may incorporate the thrombus into the plaque, causing the atherosclerotic lesion to enlarge. A partially
occlusive thrombus narrows the arterial lumen, restricts blood f ow, and can cause unstable angina or a
non—ST-elevation MI, either of which may result in SFsegment depression and/or T-wave inversion on the
EGG A totally occlusive thrombus with prolonged ischemia is the most common cause of ST-elevation M, in
which the EGGinitially shows SEsegment elevation, followed by Q.wave development if early reperfusion is
not achieved. An occlusive thrombus that recanalizes, or one that develops in a region served by adequate
collateral blood f ow, may result in less prolonged ischemia and a non—SF-elevation M instead. Serum
biomarkers of myocardial necrosis include cardiac-specific troponins and creatine kinase MB isoenzyme.
ischemia will be less, and a smaller NSTEMI or UA is the more likely outcome. The distinc-
tion between NSTEMI and UA is based on the degree of the ischemia and whether the event
is severe enough to cause necrosis, indicated by the presence of certain serum biomarkers
(see Fig. 7-3). Nonetheless, NSTEMI and UA act quite alike, and the management of these
entities is similar.

Occasionally, a non—ST-elevation infarct may result from total coronary occlusion. In this
case, it is likely that a substantial collateral blood supply (see Chapter 1) limits the extent of
necrosis, such that a larger ST-elevation MI is prevented.

Nonatherosclerotic Causes of Acute Myocardial Infarction
Infrequently, mechanisms other than acute thrombus formation can precipitate an acute MI
(Table 7-2). These should be suspected when an ACS occurs in a young patient or a per-
son without atherosclerotic risk factors. For example, coronary emboli from mechanical or
infected cardiac valves may lodge in the coronary circulation, inf ammation from acute vas-
culitis can initiate coronary occlusion, or patients with connective tissue disorders, or peri-
partum women, can rarely experience a spontaneous coronary artery dissection (a tear in
168 Chapter 7

° Atherosclerotic plaque rupture with superimposed thrombus

* Vasculitic syndromes (see Chapter 15)

* @ronary embolism (e.g., from endocarditis, artif cial heart valves)

* @ngenital anomalies of the coronary arteries

* @ronary trauma or aneurysm

* Spontaneous coronary artery dissection

* Severe coronary artery spasm (primary or cocaine-induced)

* Increased blood viscosity (e.g., polycythemia vera, thrombocytosis)

° Markedly increased myocardial oxygen demand (e.g., severe aortic stenosis)
TTT
the vessel wall that may lead to occlusion, described in Chapter 15). Occasionally, intense
transient coronary spasm can suff ciently reduce myocardial blood supply to result in UA
or infarction.

Cocaine abuse can also lead to an ACS. Cocaine increases sympathetic tone by block-
ing the presynaptic reuptake of norepinephrine and by enhancing the release of adrenal
catecholamines, which can lead to vasospasm and therefore decreased myocardial oxygen
supply. An ACS may ensue because of increased myocardial oxygen demand resulting from
cocaine-induced sympathetic myocardial stimulation (increased heart rate and blood pres-
sure) in the face of the decreased oxygen supply.

These nonatherosclerotic causes are relatively rare causes of acute MI. However, they are
important to recognize as their treatments differ from those of typical ACSs due to plaque
rupture and superimposed thrombus formation, as discussed in this chapter.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
MI (either STEMI or NSTEMI) results when myocardial ischemia is suff ciently severe to cause
myocyte necrosis. Although by def nition UA does not result in necrosis, it may subsequently
progress to MI if the underlying pathophysiology is not promptly corrected.

In addition to their clinical classif cations, infarctions can be described pathologically by
the extent of necrosis they produce within the myocardial wall. Transmural infarcts span
the entire thickness of the myocardial wall and result from total, prolonged occlusion of an
epicardial coronary artery. Conversely, subendocardial infarcts exclusively involve the inner-
most layers of the myocardium. The subendocardium is particularly susceptible to ischemia
because it is the zone subjected to the highest pressure from the ventricular chamber, has few
collateral connections that supply it, and is perfused by vessels that must pass through layers
of contracting myocardium.

Infarction represents the culmination of a disastrous cascade of events, initiated by
ischemia, that progresses from a potentially reversible phase to irreversible cell death.
Myocardium that is supplied directly by an occluded vessel may die quickly. The adjacent
tissue may not necrose immediately because it may be suff ciently perfused by nearby pat-
ent vessels. However, the neighboring cells may become increasingly ischemic over time,
as demand for oxygen continues in the face of reduced oxygen supply. Thus, the region of
infarction may subsequently extend outward. The amount of tissue that ultimately succumbs
to infarction therefore relates to (1) the mass of myocardium perfused by the occluded vessel,
(2) the magnitude and duration of impaired coronary blood flow, (3) the oxygen demand of
the affected region, (4) the adequacy of collateral vessels that provide blood flow from neigh-
boring nonoccluded coronary arteries, and (5) the degree of tissue response that modif es the
ischemic process.
ete Coronary Syndromes _ 169
Pathologic Evolution of Infarction
The pathophysiologic alterations that transpire during MI occur in two stages: early
changes at the time of acute infarction and late changes during myocardial healing and
remodeling (Table 7-3).
Farly Changes in Infarction
Early changes include the histologic evolution of the infarct and the functional impact of
oxygen deprivation on myocardial contractility. These changes culminate in coagulative
necrosis of the myocardium in 2 to 4 days.

As oxygen levels fall in the myocardium supplied by an abruptly occluded coronary vessel,
there is a rapid shift from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism (Fig. 7-4). Because mitochondria can
no longer oxidize fats or products of glycolysis, high-energy phosphate production drops dramati-
cally and anaerobic glycolysis leads to the accumulation of lactic acid, resulting in a lowered pH.

Furthermore, the paucity of high-energy phosphates such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
interferes with transmembrane Na* —K* -ATPase, with resultant elevation in the concentrations
of intracellular Na* and extracellular K* . Rising intracellular Na* contributes to cellular edema.
Membrane leak and rising extracellular KX concentration contributes to alterations in the trans-
membrane electrical potential, predisposing the myocardium to lethal arrhythmias. Intracellular
calcium accumulates in the damaged myocytes and is thought to contribute to the fnal com-
mon pathway of cell destruction through the activation of degradative lipases and proteases.

Collectively, these metabolic changes decrease myocardial function as early as 2 minutes
following occlusive thrombosis. Without intervention, irreversible cell injury ensues in
20 minutes and is marked by the development of membrane defects. Proteolytic enzymes
leak across the myocyte’s altered membrane, damaging adjacent myocardium, and the release
of certain macromolecules into the circulation serves as a clinical marker of acute infarction.

Early histological changes include myocardial edema, wavy myof bers, and the presence of
contraction bands (see Table 7-3). Edema of the myocardium develops within 4 to 12 hours, as
vascular permeability increases and interstitial oncotic pressure rises (because of the leak of
intracellular proteins). Wavy myof bers appear as intercellular edema separates the myocardial

Time Event
Eanly changes
1—2 min AIP levels fall; cessation of contractility
10 min 50% depletion of AIP; cellular edema, decreased membrane potential, and
susceptibility to arrhythmias
20-24 min Irreversible cell injury
1-3 h Wavy myof bers
4-12h Hemorrhage, edema, PMN inf Itration begins
18-24 h Q@agulation necrosis (pyknotic nuclei with eosinophilic cytoplasm), edema
24d Total coagulation necrosis (no nuclei or striations, rimmed by hyperemic tissue);
monocytes appear; PMN inf Itration peaks
Late changes
5-7 d Yellow softening from resorption of dead tissue by macrophages
7+d Ganulation tissue forms, ventricular remodeling
7 wk Fibrosis and scarring complete
a
AIP, adenosine triphosphate; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocyte.
170 chapter 7
J ATP
T Proteases
FIGURE7-4. Mechanisms of cell death in myocardial infarction. Acute ischemia rapidly depletes the
intracellular supply of adenosine triphosphate (AIP) as aerobic metabolism fails. Subsequent intracellular
acidosis and impairment of AIP-dependent processes culminate in intracellular calctum accumulation, edema,
and cell death.
cells that are tugged about by the surrounding, functional myocardium. Contraction bands
can often be seen near the borders of the infarct: sarcomeres are contracted and consolidated
and appear as bright eosinophilic belts (Fig. 7-5A).

An acute inflammatory response, with inf Itration of neutrophils, begins after approximately
4 hours and incites further tissue damage. Within 18 to 24 hours, coagulation necrosis is evi-
dent on light microscopy (Fig. 7-5B) with pyknotic nuclei and bland eosinophilic cytoplasm.

Gross morphologic changes (dark, mottled discoloration of infarcted tissue) do not appear
until 18 to 24 hours after coronary occlusion, although certain staining techniques (e.g., tet-
razolium) permit the pathologist to identify regions of infarction earlier.

Late Changes in Infarction
Late pathologic change in the course of an MI includes (1) the clearing of necrotic myocar-
dium and (2) the deposition of collagen to form scar tissue.

Five to seven days after infarction, the process of wound healing progresses. Irreversibly
injured myocytes do not regenerate; rather, the cells are removed and replaced by f brous tis-
sue. Macrophages invade the inflamed myocardium shortly after neutrophil inf ltration and
remove necrotic tissue (Fig. 7-SC). This period of tissue resorption is termed yellow softening
because connective tissue elements are destroyed and removed along with dead myocardial
cells. The phagocytic clearing, combined with thinning and dilatation of the infarcted zone,
results in structural weakness of the ventricular wall and the possibility of myocardial wall
rupture at this stage.

Approximately | week after infarction, granulation tissue appears, representing the begin-
ning of the scarring process (Fig. 7-5D). This is observed grossly as a red border at the edge of
the infarct. Fibrosis subsequently ensues, and scarring is complete by 7 weeks after infarction
(Fig. 7-5E).
Acute Goronary Syndromes 171
ee Ea a S UE es Sat Cas ee eal
" oer oe ee LE a Sees a Se areata Ce aoe deen eee Oe
| gS OG, Te RI rg OE ea ee EE igs EO RE ath NE MeN err A
Boh ee ee et TE a dS are Wes a
eer ee ee shag re ep ee = mea tees ater: SS TT Saale, <i
et ele Bt Bes BPE a PEENSY a) itty 2 Shy coke Cae he eee
eS ei ah RS Ne CNIS PET ee male i¥ _ Be, JOT acne i Wie ea
CT genre ae ree nae rn eM 4) ea casi eT EL Pp re
Po RY Pe Rigg eer otras See page eshte gs Sr ENaC LT Git ha ae
So SET oa ae a Re Go eee Re ens ET ND an ae ee a
SO ae ete ha reer Se Me SOMES MS Tae gy tr RN oe re i
| hE pee re, OO Sie aes 9 Cate oe Oe Winn ae oe As. Ne ny od Bi” gt Foy ec es
Sr Mpes Ne on S| ee a 28 eG wore > : Hg Oa ee, See Re aw ty:
FEWER p agi DS Sean Beak Pe es Ee ee
me a ae Te er EO MT rm ma LL int IO ERT oer
eg NaS ee oe | Se, ie re
ey eS ee ee = Aa RT eS PL i sna eg HES
= ie ee Me YE BS Sots —_— AR ise Sa ro i Cader ne, ak ee
Ss Ae ee 6 ee 3 eee - — ee eee bas nee
A B
ee Vis | re Wry tee ONES eS ee Se 7 La — -
Yo a Gene ee Som. rie NS Oe i ee => ee ee es co an =p fF “
ge Ney he Poteet het eA OG ee Ee ee Ae <n
ey A ee ET er re hee eatios See ef , > es Y i ea rays
aa eee: BE cp re ee Ay ce Sah reais ee tee ee ee in es pe Sj -
SS arog 2 >t EAR eRe ee aD ae -£ 4 Py en) > sar" —
Py moe LR Ea Ae Pe tS ys Sie eS eee =F %.$ rc EP
RTE ME OORT eS eS oy SES
= eS. " a ~ eas a~ "3 ad u , aa oe = ad = f ee:
MST AL ES Ae LOT EG aig a a ys [pet SS sn ngete ge ey © ait Penh eee
2 Fee Minton é° Soak Se | —— ‘ Auer, ee nat - ante a ae he
~~ we =a ey <) . Ae ae oe a Se 2 oo PP we - A sagt. Otte at
ie ON URS lege ns ae PS a ! ek Se ee oe ee oe
=a ‘ Race tt ae et “ Re eee SEE a Sreeer
>" Ae ae Qe n= ny Se pA on Joe Sane ee = - We eee ms
DP ES Pe ee ee eee Ay A te
o oe Leal , ee a Ser eee Nt porwr St fee fmt 2 Se ool eg
Sie ES 1 SS ee gt re a ER a ‘ he ¥ rie. = "_e- Se s
gt <oF @ SP aae  Sae , : ». ek © pe Re eee 5
Cc D
Si a i" _ a Sans ae ae
. _ _- > Sai wv 2S
— eS = — — ~sorek he
eS ns OP ur ae
a ee sk ~e ae ee
> ae eee
eee -- - a Ap = ee a
—- : s ee ae
a <= : ao
ore
a mall ASS a a : =< a a a Sl
Re
—— = er —— = -
eS tS er api :
E
HGURE7-5. Pathologic evolution in myocardial infarction. A. Acute infarct approximately 12 hours old
showing contraction band necrosis, nuclear karyolysis, focal hemorrhage, and an absence of inf ammation.
B Acute infarct approximately 24 to 48 hours old showing coagulation necrosis and dense infiltration of
neutrophils. C Healing infarct approximately 5 days old showing necrotic myocytes undergoing removal by
macrophages, with the neutrophilic response having largely dissipated. D. Healing infarct approximately
10 days old showing granulation tissue with new blood vessels (neovascularization), mild chronic inf ammation
(macrophages and lymphocytes), fibroblasts, and early collagen deposition; viable myocardium is present at
the upper left. E. Healed infarct approximately 1 to 2 months old showing dense fibrosis; the inf ammation and
new vessels have largely regressed; viable myocardium is present at the upper left. All images are hematoxylin
and eosin-stained sections.(QGourtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA).
172 (chapter 7

Functional Alterations

Impaired Ontractility and @mpliance
The destruction of functional myocardial cells in infarction quickly leads to impaired ven-
tricular contraction (systolic dysfunction). Cardiac output is further compromised because
synchronous contraction of myocytes is lost. Specific terms are used to describe the types
of wall motion abnormalities that can result. A localized region of reduced contraction is
termed hypokinetic, a segment that does not contract at all is called akinetic, and a dyskinetic
region is one that bulges outward during contraction of the remaining functional portions of
the ventricle.

During an ACS, the left ventricle is also adversely compromised by diastolic dysfunc-
tion. Ischemia and/or infarction impair diastolic relaxation (an energy-dependent process;
see Chapter 1), which reduces ventricular compliance and contributes to elevated ventricular
f lling pressures.

Stunned Myocardium
Sometimes transient myocardial ischemia can result in a very prolonged, but gradually revers-
ible, period of contractile dysfunction. For example, as described in Chapter 6, stunned myo-
cardium is tissue that demonstrates prolonged systolic dysfunction after a discrete episode of
severe ischemia, despite restoration of adequate blood flow, and gradually regains contractile
force days to weeks later. For example, stunning may occur following reperfusion therapy
for acute STEMI, in which case prolonged contractile dysfunction of affected ventricular seg-
ments may simulate infarcted tissue. However, if the tissue is simply stunned rather than
necrotic, its function will recover over time.

Ischemic Preconditioning
Brief ischemic insults to a region of myocardium may render that tissue more resistant to sub-
sequent episodes, a phenomenon termed ischemic preconditioning. The clinical relevance is
that patients who sustain an MI in the context of recent angina experience less morbidity and
mortality than those without preceding ischemic episodes. The mechanism of this phenom-
enon is not fully understood but appears to involve multiple signaling pathways that involve
both local and systemic mediators. Substances released during ischemia, including adenosine
and bradykinin, are believed to be key triggers of these pathways.

Ventricular Remodeling
Following an MI, changes occur in the geometry of both infarcted and noninfarcted ven-
tricular muscle. Such alterations in chamber size and wall thickness affect long-term cardiac
function and prognosis.

In the early post-MI period, infarct expansion may occur, in which the affected ventricular
segment enlarges without additional myocyte necrosis. Infarct expansion represents thinning
and dilatation of the necrotic zone of tissue, likely because of “slippage” between the muscle
f bers, resulting in a decreased volume of myocytes in the region. Infarct expansion can be
detrimental because it increases ventricular size, which (1) augments wall stress, (2) impairs
systolic contractile function, and (3) increases the likelihood of aneurysm formation.

In addition to early expansion of the infarcted territory, remodeling of the ventricle may also
involve dilatation of the overworked noninfarcted segments, which are subjected to increased
wall stress. This dilatation begins in the early postinfarct period and continues over the ensuing
weeks and months. Initially, chamber dilatation serves a compensatory role because it increases
Acute Goronary Syndromes 173
cardiac output via the Frank—Starling mechanism (see Chapter 9), but progressive enlargement
may ultimately lead to heart failure and predisposes to ventricular arrhythmias.

Adverse ventricular remodeling can be benef cially modifed by certain interventions.
At the time of infarction, for example, reperfusion therapies limit infarct size and therefore
decrease the likelihood of infarct expansion. In addition, drugs that interfere with the renin—
angiotensin system have been shown to attenuate progressive remodeling and to reduce
short- and long-term mortality after infarction (as discussed later in the chapter).

CLINICAL FEATURES OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROVES
Because ACSs represent disorders along a continuum, their clinical features overlap. In
general, the severity of symptoms and associated laboratory fndings progress from UA on
one side of the continuum, through NSTEMI, to STEMI on the other end of the continuum.
Distinguishing among these syndromes is based on the clinical presentation, electrocar-
diographic fndings, and serum biomarkers of myocardial damage. To institute appropriate
immediate therapy, the most important distinction to make is between an ACS that causes
ST-segment elevation on the electrocardiogram (STEMI) and those acute syndromes that do
not (UA and NSTEMI).

Cinical Presentation

Unstable Angina
UA presents as an acceleration of ischemic symptoms in one of the following three ways:
(1) a crescendo pattern in which a patient with chronic stable angina experiences a sudden
increase in the frequency, duration, and/or intensity of ischemic episodes; (2) episodes of
angina that unexpectedly occur at rest, without provocation; or (3) the new onset of anginal
episodes, described as severe, in a patient without previous symptoms of coronary artery
disease. These presentations are different from the pattern of chronic stable angina, in which
instances of chest discomfort are predictable, brief, and nonprogressive, occurring only dur-
ing physical exertion or emotional stress. Patients with UA may progress further along the
continuum of ACS and develop evidence of necrosis (i.e., acute NSTEMI or STEMI) unless the
condition is recognized and promptly treated.

Acute Myocardial Infarction
The symptoms and physical f ndings of acute MI (both STEMI and NSTEMI) can be predicted
from the pathophysiology described earlier in this chapter and are summarized in Table 7-4.
The discomfort experienced during an MI resembles angina pectoris qualitatively but is usu-
ally more severe, lasts longer, and may radiate more widely. Like angina, the sensation may
result from the release of mediators such as adenosine and lactate from ischemic myocar-
dial cells onto local nerve endings. Because ischemia in acute MI persists and proceeds to
necrosis, these provocative substances continue to accumulate and activate afferent nerves
for longer periods. The discomfort is often referred to other regions of the C7 through T4
dermatomes, including the neck, shoulders, and arms. Initial symptoms are usually rapid in
onset and briskly crescendo to leave the patient with a profound “feeling of doom.” Unlike a
transient attack of angina, the pain does not wane with rest, and there may be little response
to the administration of sublingual nitroglycerin.

The chest discomfort associated with an acute MI is often severe but not always. In fact,
up to 25% of patients who sustain an MI are asymptomatic during the acute event, and the
diagnosis is made only in retrospect. This is particularly common among diabetic patients
who may not adequately sense pain because of associated neuropathy.
174 (chapter 7

1. Characteristic pain * Severe, persistent, typically substernal

2. Sympathetic effect * Daphoresis
* @ol and clammy skin

3. Parasympathetic (vagal * Nausea, vomiting

effect) * Weakness

4. Inf ammatory response ° Mid fever

5. Cardiac findings ° S, (and S; if systolic dysfunction present) gallop
* Dyskinetic bulge (in anterior wall Ml)
° Systolic murmur (if mitral regurgitation or VSD)

6. Other * Pulmonary rales (if heart failure present)

* Jugular venous distention (if heart failure or right ventricular M)
OO e—CSCCSCSCié‘a
M, myocardial infarction; S;, third heart sound; S,, fourth heart sound; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

The combination of intense discomfort and baroreceptor unloading (if hypotension is
present) may trigger a dramatic sympathetic nervous system response. Systemic signs of
subsequent catecholamine release include diaphoresis (sweating), tachycardia, and cool and
clammy skin caused by vasoconstriction.

If the ischemia affects a suffciently large amount of myocardium, left ventricular (LV)
contractility can be reduced (systolic dysfunction), thereby decreasing the stroke volume and
causing the diastolic volume and pressure within the LV to rise. The increase in LV pressure,
compounded by the ischemia-induced stiffness of the chamber (diastolic dysfunction), is con-
veyed to the left atrium and pulmonary veins. The resultant pulmonary congestion decreases
lung compliance and stimulates juxtacapillary receptors. These J receptors effect a reflex that
results in rapid, shallow breathing and evokes the subjective feeling of dyspnea. Transudation
of fluid into the alveoli exacerbates this symptom.

Physical f ndings during an acute MI depend on the location and extent of the infarct. The
S, sound, indicative of atrial contraction into a noncompliant left ventricle, is frequently present
(see Chapter 2). An S; sound, indicative of volume overload in the presence of failing LV sys-
tolic function, may also be heard. A systolic murmur may appear if ischemia-induced papillary
muscle dysfunction causes mitral valvular insuff ciency or if the infarct ruptures through the
interventricular septum to create a ventricular septal defect (as discussed later in the chapter).

Myocardial necrosis also activates systemic responses to inflammation. Cytokines such
as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) are released from macrophages and
vascular endothelium in response to tissue injury. These mediators evoke an array of clinical
responses, including low-grade fever.

Not all patients with severe chest pain are in the midst of MI or UA. Table 7-5 lists other
common causes of acute chest discomfort and clinical, laboratory, and radiographic features
to differentiate them from an ACS.

Diagnosis of Acute @ronary Syndromes

The diagnosis of, and distinctions among, the ACSs is made on the basis of (1) the patient’s
presenting symptoms, (2) acute ECG abnormalities, and (3) detection of specif c serum mark-
ers of myocardial necrosis (see Table 7-6 and Fig. 7-3). Specif cally, UA is a clinical diagnosis
supported by the patient’s symptoms, transient ST abnormalities on the ECG (usually ST
depression and/or T-wave inversion), and the absence of serum biomarkers of myocardial
necrosis. Non—ST-segment elevation MI is distinguished from UA by the detection of serum
markers of necrosis and often more persistent ST or T-wave abnormalities. The hallmark of
ST-elevation MI is an appropriate clinical history coupled with ST elevations on the ECG plus
detection of serum markers of myocardial necrosis.
Acute Gronary Syndromes 175
Qndition Differentiating Features
Cardiac
Acute coronary syndrome _—_»-_Retrosternal pressure, radiating to the neck, jaw, or left shoulder and arm; more
severe and lasts longer than previous anginal attacks
* BG localized ST elevations or depressions
Pericarditis * Sharp pleuritic pain (worsens with inspiration)
* Pain varies with position (relieved by sitting forward)
* Friction rub auscultated over precordium
° EGG diffuse ST elevations (see Chapter 14)
Aortic dissection ° Tearing, ripping pain that migrates over time (chest and back; see Chapter 15)
* Asymmetry of arm blood pressures
* Widened mediastinum on chest radiograph
Pulmonary
Pulmonary embolism * Localized pleuritic pain, accompanied by dyspnea
* Pleural friction rub may be present
* Predisposing conditions for venous thrombosis
Pneumonia * Pleuritic chest pain
* @ugh and sputum production
¢ Abnormal lung auscultation and percussion (1.e., consolidation)
° Inf Itrate on chest radiograph
Pneumothorax * Sudden sharp, pleuritic unilateral chest pain
* Decreased breath sounds and hyperresonance of affected side
* Chest radiograph: increased lucency and absence of pulmonary markings
QGasstrointestinal
Esophageal spasm * Retrosternal pain, worsened by swallowing
° History of dysphagia
Acute cholecystitis * Right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness
* Often accompanied by nausea
* History of fatty food intolerance
SS
KGG Abnormalities
ECG abnormalities, which ref ect abnormal electrical currents during an ACS, are usually mani-
fest in characteristic ways. In UA or NSTEMI, ST-segment depression and/or T-wave inver-
sions may occur (Fig. 7-6). These abnormalities may be transient, occurring just during chest
pain episodes in UA, or they may persist in patients with NSTEMI. In contrast, as described
in Chapter 4, STEMI presents with a temporal sequence of abnormalities: initial ST-segment
Myocardial Infarction
Feature Unstable Angina NSTEVE STEM
Typical symptoms Gescendo, rest, or new- Prolonged “crushing” chest pain, more severe
onset severe angina and wider radiation than usual angina
Serum biomarkers No Yes Yes
Hectrocardiogram initial ST depression and/ or ST depression and/ or ST elevation (and
f ndings ‘T-wave inversion T-wave inversion Q waves later)
SS
NSTEM, non—SF elevation myocardial infarction; STEM, ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
176 (chapter 7
Unstable Angina/Non-ST-Elevation elevation, followed over the course of several hours
Myocardial Infarction by inversion of the T wave and the appearance of
Acute pathologic Q waves (Fig. 7-7). Importantly, these
characteristic patterns of ECG abnormalities in ACS
can be minimized or prevented by early therapeutic
interventions.
Weeks . . ° (74 99
Normal later Historically, MIs had been classif ed as “Q-wave
* T-wave inversion or “non—Q-wave” infarctions before the advent of
J \ the terms “STEMI” and “NSTEMI,” respectively. The
older terminology, which is still occasionally encoun-
\ J «ST &T normal tered, reflected the fact that pathologically transmu-
* no Q waves ral infarctions typically produce pathologic Q waves
(after an initial period of ST elevation), whereas sub-
* ST depression endocardial infarctions do not. However, it is now
HGURE7-6. EGG abnommalities in unstable angina known that ne “evelopment of °. waves does he
and non—-SF elevation myocardial infarction. reliably corre ate wit pathologic ndings and t at
much overlap exists among the types of infarction.
Moreover, the fnding of new pathologic Q waves to classify ACSs now has little therapeutic
relevance because Q waves, when they occur, take hours to develop and therefore are not
helpful in making acute treatment decisions.
Serum Markers of Infarction
Necrosis of myocardial tissue causes disruption of the sarcolemma, so that intracellular mac-
romolecules leak into the cardiac interstitium and ultimately into the bloodstream (Fig. 7-8).
Detection of such molecules in the serum, particularly cardiac-specifc troponins, serves
important diagnostic and prognostic roles. In patients with STEMI or NSTEMI, these markers
rise above a threshold level in a def ned temporal sequence.
Cardiac-specif c Troponins
Troponin is a regulatory protein in muscle cells that controls interactions between myosin
and actin (see Chapter 1). It consists of three subunits: TnC, TnI, and TnT. Although these
subunits are found in both skeletal and cardiac muscles, the cardiac forms of troponin I
(cTnI) and troponin T (cTnT) are structurally unique, and highly specif c and sensitive assays
for their detection in the serum are in wide clinical use. The presence of even minor serum
elevations of these biomarkers serves as evidence of cardiomyocyte injury, is diagnostic of
infarction in the appropriate clinical setting, and conveys powerful prognostic information.
However, as new generations of these assays have become ever more sensitive, small serum
STElevation Myocardial Infarction
Normal Acute Hours Days 1-2 Days Weeks
later later
¢ ST elevation ¢ ST elevation ¢ T-wave inversion ¢ ST normalizes ST &T normal
¢ JR Wave *Q wave deeper ¢ T wave inverted *Q wave persists
* Q wave begins
HGURE7-7. KGGevolution during SFelevation myocardial infarction.
Acute Gronary Syndromes 177
50
20
10 Troponins
5
2
} a
HGURE7-8. luti f
(CURE 7-8. Evolution of serum 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
biomarkers in acute myocardial
infarction (MD. Days after onset of infarction
elevations can also be detected in conditions other than MI, related to acute cardiac strain or
inflammation (e.g., in heart failure, myocarditis, hypertensive crises, or pulmonary embolism
[due to right ventricular strain]).

In the case of MI, cardiac troponin serum levels begin to rise 3 to 4 hours after the onset of
chest discomfort, achieve a peak level between 18 and 36 hours, and then decline slowly, allow-
ing for detection for 10 days or more after a large MI. Thus, their measurement may be helpful
for detection of MI for nearly 2 weeks after the event occurs. Given their high sensitivity and
specif city, cardiac troponins are the preferred serum biomarkers to detect myocardial necrosis.

CGeatine Kinase
The enzyme creatine kinase (CK) is found in the heart, skeletal muscle, brain, and other
organs. Injury to any of these tissues may lead to elevation in serum concentrations of the
enzyme. There are, however, three isoenzymes of CK that improve diagnostic specif city of
its origin: CK-MM (found mainly in skeletal muscle), CK-BB (located predominantly in the
brain), and CK-MB (localized mainly in the heart). Elevation of CK-MB is highly suggestive
of myocardial injury. To facilitate the diagnosis of MI using this marker, it is common to
calculate the ratio of CK-MB to total CK. The ratio is usually greater than 2.5% in the setting
of myocardial injury and less than that when CK-MB elevation is from another source. The
serum level of CK-MB starts to rise 3 to 8 hours following infarction, peaks at 24 hours, and
returns to normal within 48 to 72 hours (see Fig. 7-8). As CK-MB is not as sensitive or specif c
for detection of myocardial injury as is cardiac troponin, the latter is the preferred diagnostic
biomarker in clinical use. Because troponin and CK-MB levels do not become elevated in the
serum until at least a few hours after the onset of MI symptoms, a single normal value drawn
early in the course of evaluation (e.g., in the hospital emergency department) does not rule
out an acute MI; thus, the diagnostic utility of these biomarkers is limited in that critical
period. As a result, early decision making in patients with ACS often relies most heavily on
the patient’s history and ECG f ndings.
Imaging

Sometimes, the early diagnosis of MI can remain uncertain even after careful evaluation of the
patient’s history, ECG, and serum biomarkers. In such a situation, an additional diagnostic
study that may be useful in the acute setting is echocardiography, which often reveals new
abnormalities of ventricular contraction in the region of ischemia or infarction.
178 ChapterP

TREATMENT OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES
Successful management of ACS requires rapid initiation of therapy to limit myocardial damage
and minimize complications. Therapy must address the intracoronary thrombus that incited
the syndrome and provide anti-ischemic measures to restore the balance between myocardial
oxygen supply and demand. Although certain therapeutic aspects are common to all ACS,
there is a critical difference in the approach to patients who present with ST-segment eleva-
tion (STEMI) compared with those without ST-segment elevation (UA and NSTEMI). Patients
with STEMI typically have total occlusion of a coronary artery and for optimal therapy require
very rapid reperfusion therapy (mechanical or pharmacologic), whereas patients without ST
elevation generally do not (see Fig. 7-9 and as discussed later in the chapter).

General in-hospital measures for any patient with ACS include admitting the patient to
an intensive care setting where continuous ECG monitoring for arrhythmias is undertaken.
The patient is initially maintained at bed rest to minimize myocardial oxygen demand, while
supplemental oxygen is provided (by face mask or nasal cannula), if there is any degree of
hypoxemia, to improve oxygen supply. Analgesics, such as morphine, may be administered
to reduce chest pain and associated anxiety.

Acute Treatment of Unstable Angina and Non—SFHevation Myocardial

Infarction
The management of UA and NSTEMI is essentially the same and is therefore discussed as one
entity, whereas the approach to STEMI is described later. The primary focus of treatment for
UA and NSTEMI consists of anti-ischemic medications to restore the balance between myocar-
dial oxygen supply and demand, and antithrombotic therapy to prevent further growth, and to
facilitate resolution of, the underlying partially occlusive coronary thrombus.

Anti-ischemic Therapy
The same pharmacologic agents used to decrease myocardial oxygen demand in chronic sta-
ble angina are appropriate in UA and NSTEMI but are often administered more aggressively.
B-Blockers decrease sympathetic drive to the myocardium, thus reducing oxygen demand,
and contribute to electrical stability. This group of drugs reduces the likelihood of progres-
sion from UA to MI and lowers mortality rates in patients who present with infarction. In the
absence of contraindications (e.g., marked bradycardia, bronchospasm, decompensated heart
failure, or hypotension), a B-blocker is usually initiated in the frst 24 hours to achieve a target
heart rate of approximately 60 beats/min. Such therapy is usually continued indef nitely after
hospitalization because of proven long-term mortality benef ts following an MI.

Nitrates help bring about anginal relief through venodilation, which lowers myocardial
oxygen demand by diminishing venous return to the heart (reduced preload and therefore
less ventricular wall stress). Nitrates may also improve coronary flow and prevent vasospasm
through coronary vasodilation. In UA or NSTEMI, nitroglycerin is often initially administered
by the sublingual route, followed by a continuous intravenous infusion. In addition to pro-
viding symptomatic relief of angina, intravenous nitroglycerin is useful as a vasodilator in
patients with ACS accompanied by heart failure or severe hypertension.

Nondihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists (i.e., verapamil and diltiazem) exert anti-
ischemic effects by decreasing heart rate and contractility and through their vasodilatory prop-
erties (see Chapter 6). These agents do not confer mortality benef t to patients with ACS and
are reserved for those in whom ischemia persists despite B-blocker and nitrate therapies or for
those with contraindications to B-blocker use. They should not be prescribed to patients with LV
systolic dysfunction, because clinical trials have shown adverse outcomes in that case.
Acute Qronary Syndromes 179
= =e
A
B
HGURE7-9. Initial management strategies in acute coronary syndromes (AGS). A. Revascularization
options. Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PC) is the preferred approach for STEM patients if it
is available rapidly. In UA/ NSTEM, early invasive assessment is advised in patients with high-risk features.

B Pharmacologic agents that are typically indicated in AG. Platelet P2Y,, inhibitors include clopidogrel,

ticagrelor, and prasugrel. Note that when a glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa receptor antagonist is used as an

additional antiplatelet agent, it is typically initiated at the time of PC. Bivalirudin is an anticoagulant

option for patients with AGS undergoing PC. EGG electrocardiogram; CCB, calcium channel blocker; LMWH,

low molecular weight heparin; UFH, unfractionated intravenous heparin; AG, angiotensin-converting enzyme.

Antithrombotic Therapy

The purpose of antithrombotic therapy, including antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications,
is to prevent further propagation of the partially occlusive intracoronary thrombus while
facilitating its dissolution by endogenous mechanisms.
180. chapter 7

Antiplatelet Drugs
The majority of patients with UA or NSTEMI should receive at least two forms of antiplatelet
therapy, typically aspirin and an inhibitor of the platelet P2Y,, ADP receptor.

Aspirin inhibits platelet synthesis of thromboxane A;, a potent mediator of platelet activa-
tion (see Chapter 17), and is one of the most important interventions to reduce mortality in
patients with all forms of ACS. It should be administered immediately on presentation and
continued indef nitely in patients without contraindications to its use (e.g., allergy or underly-
ing bleeding disorder).

Aspirin inhibits only a single pathway of platelet activation. Another important agonist is
ADP, which activates platelets in part by binding to the platelet P2 Y,, receptor (see Chapter 17).
Antagonists of this receptor inhibit platelet activation and include clopidogrel, prasugrel, and
ticagrelor. Clopidogrel is an oral thienopyridine derivative (described in Chapter 17) that
further reduces cardiovascular death, recurrent MI, and stroke rates in patients with UA or
NSTEMI who are treated with aspirin.

However, not all patients respond to clopidogrel with similar benef t as it is a prodrug that
requires cytochrome P-450—mediated biotransformation to its active metabolite. Patients with
reduced function polymorphisms of the CYP2C19 gene produce lower concentrations of clopi-
dogrel’s activate metabolite, less platelet inhibition, and attenuated clinical benef ts. Thus,
newer P2Y,, ADP receptor blockers have been developed that do not have this metabolic
shortcoming, have more rapid onsets of action, and achieve greater degrees of platelet inhibi-
tion than clopidogrel. For example, prasugrel is also a thienopyridine derivative. Compared to
clopidogrel, it reduces coronary event rates in patients with ACS who undergo percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI), but because it is more potent, it also increases the risk of bleed-
ing complications.

Both clopidogrel and prasugrel are irreversible platelet inhibitors. Ticagrelor is a nonthi-
enopyridine drug that is a reversible P2 Y,, ADP receptor blocker. Compared to clopidogrel, it
has been shown to further decrease major cardiovascular events and mortality, without an
increased risk of life-threatening bleeding episodes; minor bleeding is, however, more com-
mon than with clopidogrel.

In some circumstances, even more powerful antiplatelet agents are utilized in ACSs. The
glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists (which include the monoclonal antibody
abciximab and the small molecules eptif batide and tirof ban) are potent antiplatelet agents
that block the fnal common pathway of platelet aggregation (see Chapter 17). These agents
are effective in reducing adverse coronary events in patients undergoing PCI. In patients pre-
senting with UA or NSTEMI, their benef t is manifest primarily in those at the highest risk of
complications (e.g., the presence of elevated serum troponin levels or recurrent episodes of
chest pain). When used, GP IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists are most commonly initiated in the
cardiac catheterization laboratory at the time of PCI.

Anticoagulant Drugs

Intravenous unfractionated heparin (UFH) has long been standard anticoagulant therapy for
UA and NSTEML. It binds to antithrombin, which greatly increases the potency of that plasma
protein in the inactivation of clot-forming thrombin. UFH additionally inhibits coagulation
factor Xa, slowing thrombin formation and thereby further impeding clot development. In
patients with UA or NSTEMI, UFH improves cardiovascular outcomes and reduces the likeli-
hood of progression from UA to MI. It is administered as a weight-based bolus, followed by
continuous intravenous infusion. Because of a high degree of pharmacodynamic variability,
its anticoagulant effect must be monitored and its dose adjusted, through serial measure-
ments of the serum activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). It is the least expensive of
the anticoagulant drugs described in this section.
Acute Coronary Syndromes 181

To overcome the pharmacologic shortcomings of UFH, low molecular weight heparins
(LMWHs) were developed. Like UFH, LMWHs interact with antithrombin but preferentially
inhibit coagulation factor Xa. They provide a more predictable pharmacologic response than
UFH. As a result, LMWHs are easier to use, prescribed as one or two daily subcutaneous
injections based on the patient’s weight. Unlike UFH, repeated monitoring of blood tests
and dosage adjustments are not generally necessary. In clinical trials in patients with UA or
NSTEMI, the LMWH enoxaparin (see Chapter 17) has demonstrated reduced death and isch-
emic event rates compared with UFH.

Two other types of anticoagulants have also been shown to be benef cial in UA and
NSTEMI and are sometimes used in place of UFH or LMWH. Bivalirudin is an intravenous
direct thrombin inhibitor (see Chapter 17), which is equivalent to UFH plus a GP IIb/ IIa
inhibitor in preventing adverse ischemic outcomes, with less associated bleeding, in patients
with UA or NSTEMI treated with an early invasive strategy. Fondaparinux is a subcutane-
ously administered agent that is a very specif factor Xa inhibitor (see Chapter 17). Its effect
is similar to the LMWH enoxaparin at reducing cardiac adverse events but with fewer bleed-
ing complications.

With all of these choices, the decision of which anticoagulant to prescribe to an individual
patient often depends on whether an initial conservative versus invasive approach is followed.

Conservative versus Early Invasive Management of UA and NSTEVE

Many patients with UA or NSTEMI stabilize following institution of the therapies described
in the previous section, while others have recurrent ischemic events. There is currently no
def nitive way to predict which direction a patient will take or to quickly determine which
individuals have such severe underlying CAD that coronary revascularization is warranted.
These uncertainties have led to two therapeutic strategies in UA/ NSTEMI: (1) an early inva-
sive approach, in which urgent cardiac catheterization is performed and coronary revascu-
larization undertaken as indicated, and (2) a conservative approach, in which the patient is
managed with medications (as detailed in the previous section) and undergoes angiography
only if ischemic episodes spontaneously recur or if the results of a subsequent stress test indi-
cate substantial residual inducible ischemia. The conservative approach offers the advantage
of avoiding costly and potentially risky invasive procedures. Conversely, an early invasive
strategy allows rapid identif cation and def nitive treatment (i.e., revascularization) for those
with critical coronary disease.

In general, an early invasive approach is recommended to patients with refractory angina,
with complications such as shock or ventricular arrhythmias, or those with the most concern-
ing clinical features. Risk assessment algorithms consider such features and help identify
patients at high likelihood of a poor outcome. One commonly used tool is the Thrombolysis
in Myocardial Infarction (TIMD risk score that employs seven variables to predict a patient’s
risk level:

1. Age greater than 65 years old

2. >3 risk factors for coronary artery disease (as described in Chapter 5)

3. Known coronary stenosis of >50% by prior angiography

4. ST-segment deviations on the ECG at presentation

5. At least two anginal episodes in prior 24 hours

6. Use of aspirin in prior 7 days (i.e., implying resistance to aspirin’s effect)
7. Elevated serum troponin or CK-MB

Clinical studies have conf rmed that a patient’s TIMI risk score predicts the likelihood of
death or subsequent ischemic events, such that an early invasive strategy is recommended in
patients with higher scores (>3). If an early invasive approach is adopted, the patient should
undergo angiography within 72 hours, or within 24 hours for patients at especially high risk.
182. chapter 7

Acute Treatment of SF Hevation Myocardial Infarction
In contrast to UA and NSTEMI, the culprit artery in STEMI is typically completely occluded.
Thus, to limit myocardial damage, the major focus of acute treatment is to achieve very rapid
reperfusion of the jeopardized myocardium using either percutaneous coronary mechanical
revascularization or fbrinolytic drugs. These approaches reduce the extent of myocardial
necrosis and greatly improve survival. To be effective, they must be undertaken as soon as
possible; the earlier the intervention occurs, the greater the amount of myocardium that can
be salvaged. Decisions about therapy must be made within minutes of a patient’s assessment,
based on the history and electrocardiographic f ndings, often before serum markers of necro-
sis would be expected to rise.

In addition, as is the case in UA and NSTEMI, specifc medications should be initiated
promptly to prevent further thrombosis and to restore the balance between myocardial oxygen
supply and demand. For example, antiplatelet therapy with aspirin decreases mortality rates
and rates of reinfarction after STEMI. It should be administered immediately on presentation (by
chewing a tablet to facilitate absorption) and continued orally daily thereafter. An anticoagulant
(e.g., intravenous UFH) is typically initiated to help maintain patency of the coronary vessel and
is an important adjunct to PCI and f brinolytic regimens. B-Blockers reduce myocardial oxygen
demand and lower the risk of recurrent ischemia, arrhythmias, and reinfarction. In the absence
of contraindications (e.g., asthma, hypotension, or signif cant bradycardia), an oral B-blocker
should be administered to achieve a heart rate of 50 to 60 beats/min. Intravenous B-blocker
therapy should be reserved for patients who are hypertensive at presentation, as that route of
administration has otherwise been associated with an increased risk of cardiogenic shock in
STEMI. Nitrate therapy, usually intravenous nitroglycerin, is used to help control ischemic pain
and also serves as a benef cial vasodilator in patients with heart failure or severe hypertension.

Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention

The preferred method of reperfusion therapy in patients with acute STEMI is immediate car-
diac catheterization and percutaneous coronary intervention of the lesion responsible for the
infarction. This approach, termed primary PCI, is a very effective method for reestablishing
coronary perfusion and, in clinical trials performed at highly experienced medical centers,
has achieved optimal flow in the infarct-related artery in more than 95% of patients. During
the procedure, performed under fluoroscopy, a catheter is inserted into a peripheral artery
and directed to the site of coronary occlusion. A balloon at the end of the catheter is then
inflated, compressing the thrombus and atherosclerotic plaque, and a stent is usually inserted
(see Chapter 6), thereby restoring and maintaining coronary blood flow. In order to salvage
as much myocardium as possible, the goal is that the time from frst medical contact to PCI
be less than 90 minutes. At medical centers without PCI availability, the decision to transfer
a patient to a PCI-capable hospital or to treat with f brinolytic therapy (discussed in next
section) must be made rapidly. A delay in reperfusion leads to worse outcomes for patients
regardless of the mechanism chosen, and the longer the delay, the less beneft primary PCI
has over f brinolytic therapy. Generally, transfer to a PCl-capable hospital is recommended if
the procedure can be performed within 120 minutes of frst medical contact.

To reduce thrombotic complications, patients undergoing primary PCI receive a combi-
nation of medications. Aspirin and a P2Y,, receptor inhibitor (e.g., ticagrelor, prasugrel,
or clopidogrel) are the antiplatelet agents typically administered prior to the procedure. A
more potent GP IIb/IIIa platelet inhibitor is also sometimes used with PCI. Anticoagulation
therapy consists of either UFH or bivalirudin as the primary choices. Recent evidence shows
that bivalirudin results in lower rates of bleeding in STEMI when compared to UFH plus a GP
IIb/ Ila inhibitor. However, it is also associated with a higher rate of acute stent thrombosis
in this setting.
Acute Goronary Syndromes 183

After primary PCI, aspirin is continued indefnitely. For patients who receive coronary
stents during PCI, a prolonged course of a P2Y,, receptor inhibitor reduces the risk of ischemic
complications and stent thrombosis.

Kibnrinolytic Therapy
Primary PCI is the preferred reperfusion approach in acute STEMI, as it leads to greater survival
with lower rates of reinfarction and bleeding when compared to f brinolytic therapy. However,
if PCI is not available or is likely to be delayed, fbrinolytic therapy is the reperfusion alter-
native. Fibrinolytic drugs accelerate lysis of the occlusive intracoronary thrombus in STEMI,
thereby restoring blood flow and limiting myocardial damage. This section does not pertain
to patients with UA or NSTEML, as such individuals do not benef t from fbrinolytic therapy.

Currently used fbrinolytic agents include recombinant tissue—type plasminogen activator
(alteplase, tPA), reteplase (rPA), and tenecteplase (TNK-tPA). Each drug functions by stimulat-
ing the natural f brinolytic system, transforming the inactive precursor plasminogen into the active
protease plasmin, which lyses fbrin clots. Although the intracoronary thrombus is the target,
plasmin has poor substrate specif city and can degrade other proteins, including f brin’s precursor
f brinogen. As a result, bleeding is the most common complication of these drugs. Administration
of f brinolytic agents in the early hours of an acute STEMI restores blood flow in most (70% to
80% ) coronary occlusions and signif cantly reduces the extent of tissue damage. Improved artery
patency translates into substantially increased survival rates and fewer postinfarction complica-
tions. The rapid initiation of f brinolysis is crucial: patients who receive therapy within 2 hours of
the onset of symptoms of STEMI have half the mortality rate of those who receive it after 6 hours.

To prevent immediate vessel reocclusion after successful thrombolysis, anticoagulants
(UFH or LMWHs) and antiplatelet therapy, including aspirin and a platelet P2Y,, inhibitor,
are administered. For those initially treated with f brinolytic therapy who do not demonstrate
an adequate acute response, including expeditious resolution of symptoms and ST-segment
elevations, transfer of the patient to a hospital capable of performing “rescue” PCI is recom-
mended as soon as possible.

Because the major risk of thrombolysis is bleeding, contraindications to such therapy
include situations in which necessary f brin clots within the circulation would be jeopardized
(e.g., patients with active peptic ulcer disease or an underlying bleeding disorder, patients who
have had a recent stroke, or patients who are recovering from recent surgery). Consequently,
approximately 30% of patients may not be suitable candidates for thrombolysis.

Adjunctive Therapies
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors limit adverse ventricular remodeling and
reduce the incidence of heart failure, recurrent ischemic events, and mortality following an
MI. Their benef t is additive to that of aspirin and B-blocker therapies, and they have shown
favorable improvements especially in higher-risk patients—those with anterior wall infarc-
tions or LV systolic dysfunction.

Cholesterol-lowering statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors) reduce mortality rates of
patients with coronary artery disease (see Chapter 5). Clinical trials of patients with ACS
have demonstrated that it is safe to begin statin therapy early during hospitalization and that
a high-intensity lipid-lowering regimen, designed to reduce low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
levels by greater than 50% (ideally to < 70 mg/dL), provides greater protection against sub-
sequent cardiovascular events and death than less intense regimens. The benef ts of statin
therapy may extend beyond lipid lowering, because this group of drugs has attributes that can
improve endothelial dysfunction, inhibit platelet aggregation, and impair thrombus formation.
Additional LDL lowering with the cholesterol absorption inhibitor ezetimibe (see Chapter 17)
after an ACS was recently shown to further reduce subsequent cardiovascular event rates.
184 chapter 7

In addition to the short-term use of heparin anticoagulation described earlier, a more pro-
longed course, followed by oral anticoagulation (i.e., warfarin), is appropriate for patients
at high risk of thromboembolism. This includes patients with documented intraventricular
thrombus (typically identifed by echocardiography), those with atrial f brillation, and per-
sons who have suffered a large acute anterior MI with akinesis of that territory (which is
susceptible to thrombus formation because of the stagnant blood flow).

As discussed later in the chapter, impaired ventricular contractility after MI can lead to
heart failure. Patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 40% and symptoms
of heart failure after STEMI should be considered for therapy with an aldosterone antagonist
(spironolactone or eplerenone) in addition to an ACE inhibitor and beta-blocker. Aldosterone
augments sodium reabsorption from the distal nephron (contributing to fluid retention, an
undesired effect in heart failure) and also promotes inflammation and myocardial f brosis.
Chronic administration of an aldosterone antagonist mitigates these effects and has been
shown to decrease mortality following MI in patients with left ventricular dysfunction.

COVPLICATIONS
In UA, potential complications include death (5% to 10% of patients) or progression to infarc-
tion (10% to 20% of patients) over the ensuing days and weeks. Once infarction has trans-
pired, especially STEMI, complications can result from the inflammatory, mechanical, and
electrical abnormalities induced by regions of necrosing myocardium (Fig. 7-10). Early com-
plications result from myocardial necrosis itself. Those that develop several days to weeks
later reflect the inflammation and healing of necrotic tissue.
Recurrent Ischemia
Postinfarction angina has been reported in 20% to 30% of patients following an MI. This rate
has not been reduced by the use of thrombolytic therapy, but it is lower in those who have
undergone acute percutaneous coronary revascularization. Indicative of inadequate residual
HGURE7-10. @mplications of ML. Infarction may result in decreased contractility, electrical instability, and
tissue necrosis, which can lead to the indicated sequelae.
Acute Goronary Syndromes 185
TABLE 7-7
Rhythm Quse
Sinus bradycardia ° tVagal tone
° |SAnodal artery perfusion
Sinus tachycardia * Pain and anxiety
° Heart failure
* Volume depletion
* Chronotropic drugs (e.g., dopamine)
APBs, atrial fibrillation ° Heart failure
° Atrial ischemia
VPBs, VI, VF ° Ventricular ischemia
° Heart failure
AV block (1°, 2°, 3°) ° IM: ftvagal tone and | AVnodal artery f ow
° AM: extensive destruction of conduction tissue

I

AM, anterior myocardial infarction; APBs, atrial premature beats; AV atrioventricular; IM, inferior myocardial infarc-

tion; SA, sinoatrial; VPBs, ventricular premature beats; VE ventricular fibrillation; VE ventricular tachycardia.

coronary blood f ow, it is a poor omen and correlates with an increased risk for reinfarction.

Such patients usually require urgent cardiac catheterization, often followed by revasculariza-

tion by percutaneous techniques or coronary artery bypass surgery.

Arrhythmias

Arrhythmias occur frequently during acute MI and are a major source of mortality prior to

hospital arrival. Fortunately, modern coronary care units are highly attuned to the detec-

tion and treatment of rhythm disturbances; thus, once a patient is hospitalized, arrhythmia-

associated deaths are uncommon. Mechanisms that contribute to arrhythmogenesis after MI

include the following (Table 7-7):

1. Anatomic interruption of blood fow to structures of the conduction pathway (e.g., sino-
atrial node, atrioventricular node, and bundle branches); the normal perfusion of pertinent
components of the conduction system is summarized in Table 7-8.

2. Accumulation of toxic metabolic products (e.g., cellular acidosis) and abnormal transcel-
lular ion concentrations owing to membrane leaks.

3. Autonomic stimulation (sympathetic and parasympathetic).

4. Administration of potentially arrhythmogenic drugs (e.g., dopamine).

TABLE 7-8
@nduction Pathway Primary Arterial Supply
SA node * RCA (70% of patients)
AV node * RCA (85% of patients)
Bundle of His * LAD (septal branches)
Right bundle branch * Proximal portion by LAD
* Distal portion by RCA

Left bundle branch

Left anterior fascicle ° LAD

Left posterior fascicle * LADand PDA

OO _—~_~SN

AY atrioventricular; LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; PDA, posterior descending artery; RCA, right

coronary artery; SA, sinoatrial.
186 chapter 7

Ventricular Hbnillation
Ventricular f brillation (rapid, disorganized electrical activity of the ventricles) is largely
responsible for sudden cardiac death during the course of acute MI. Most fatal episodes occur
before hospital arrival, a trend that can be impacted by increasing availability of automatic
external def brillators in public places. Episodes of ventricular f brillation that occur during
the frst 48 hours of MI are often related to transient electrical instability, and the long-term
prognosis of survivors of such events is not adversely affected. However, ventricular f brilla-
tion occurring later than 48 hours after the acute MI usually reflects severe LV dysfunction
and is associated with high subsequent mortality rates.

Ventricular ectopic beats, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular f brillation during an

acute MI arise from either reentrant circuits or enhanced automaticity of ventricular cells (see
Chapter 11). Ventricular ectopic beats are common and usually not treated unless the beats
become consecutive, multifocal, or frequent. Cardiac care unit personnel are prof cient at
arrhythmia detection and institution of treatment should more malignant ventricular arrhyth-
mias develop. Therapy for ventricular arrhythmias is described in Chapter 12.

Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Supraventricular arrhythmias are also common in acute MI. Sinus bradycardia results from
either excessive vagal stimulation or sinoatrial nodal ischemia, usually in the setting of an infe-
rior wall MI. Sinus tachycardia occurs frequently and may result from pain and anxiety, heart
failure, drug administration (e.g., dopamine), or intravascular volume depletion. Because sinus
tachycardia increases myocardial oxygen demand and could exacerbate ischemia, identifying
and treating its cause are important. Atrial premature beats and atrial f brillation (see Chapter
12) may result from atrial ischemia or atrial distention secondary to LV failure.

Conduction Blocks
Conduction blocks (atrioventricular nodal block and bundle branch blocks) develop com-
monly in acute MI. They may result from ischemia or necrosis of conduction tracts, or in the
case of atrioventricular blocks, they may develop transiently because of increased vagal tone.
Vagal activity may be increased because of stimulation of afferent f bers by the inflamed myo-
cardium or as a result of generalized autonomic activation in association with the discomfort
of an acute MI.

Myocardial Dysfunction

Heart Failure
Acute cardiac ischemia results in impaired ventricular contractility (systolic dysfunction)
and increased myocardial stiffness (diastolic dysfunction), both of which may lead to symp-
toms of heart failure. In addition, ventricular remodeling, arrhythmias, and acute mechanical
complications of MI (described later in the chapter) may culminate in heart failure. Signs
and symptoms of such decompensation include dyspnea, pulmonary rales, and a third heart
sound (S;). Treatment consists of standard heart failure therapy, which typically includes
diuretics for relief of volume overload, and ACE inhibitor and B-blocker therapies for long-
term mortality benef t (see Chapter 9). As noted earlier, for patients with post-MI heart fail-
ure and an LV ejection fraction less than 40%, an aldosterone antagonist (spironolactone or
eplerenone—described in Chapter 17) should be considered. However, when an aldosterone
antagonist is prescribed concurrently with an ACE inhibitor, the serum potassium level should
be carefully monitored to prevent hyperkalemia.
Acute Goronary Syndromes 187
Cardiogenic Shock

Cardiogenic shock is a condition of severely decreased cardiac output and hypotension
(systolic blood pressure < 90 mm Hg) with inadequate perfusion of peripheral tissues that
develops when more than 40% of the LV mass has infarcted. It may also follow certain
severe mechanical complications of MI described later. Cardiogenic shock is self-perpetuating
because (1) hypotension leads to decreased coronary perfusion, which exacerbates ischemic
damage, and (2) decreased stroke volume increases LV size and therefore augments myocar-
dial oxygen demand (see Fig. 7-10). Cardiogenic shock occurs in up to 10% of patients after
MI, and the mortality rate is greater than 70%. Early cardiac catheterization and revascular-
ization can improve the prognosis.

Patients in cardiogenic shock require intravenous inotropic agents (e.g., dobutamine) to
increase cardiac output and, once the blood pressure has improved, arterial vasodilators to
reduce the resistance to LV contraction. Patients may be stabilized by the placement of an
intra-aortic balloon pump. Inserted into the aorta through a femoral artery, the pump con-
sists of an inflatable, flexible chamber that expands during diastole to increase intra-aortic
pressure, thus augmenting perfusion of the coronary arteries. During systole, it deflates to
create a “vacuum” that serves to reduce the afterload of the left ventricle, thus aiding the
ejection of blood into the aorta and improving cardiac output and peripheral tissue perfusion.

If more extensive and prolonged hemodynamic support is required, a percutaneous left
ventricular assist device (LVAD) can be placed. Using cannulae inserted via the femoral ves-
sels, a motor pumps oxygenated blood from the LA or the LV (depending on the model) to the
aorta and its branches, bypassing or “assisting” the LV.

Right Ventricular Infarction
Approximately one third of patients with infarction of the LV inferior wall also develop necro-
sis of portions of the right ventricle, because the same coronary artery (usually the right
coronary) perfuses both regions in most individuals. The resulting abnormal contraction and
decreased compliance of the right ventricle lead to signs of right-sided heart failure (e.g.,
jugular venous distention) out of proportion to signs of left-sided failure. In addition, pro-
found hypotension may result when the right ventricular dysfunction impairs blood flow
through the lungs, leading to the left ventricle becoming underf Iled. In this setting, intrave-
nous volume infusion serves to correct hypotension, often guided by hemodynamic measure-
ments via a transvenous pulmonary artery catheter (see Chapter 3).
Mechanical Complications
Mechanical complications following MI result from cardiac tissue ischemia and necrosis.
Papillary Muscle Rupture
Ischemic necrosis and rupture of an LV papillary muscle may be rapidly fatal because of acute
severe mitral regurgitation, as the valve leaflets lose their anchoring attachments. Partial rup-
ture, with more moderate regurgitation, is not immediately lethal but may result in symptoms
of heart failure or pulmonary edema. Because it has a more precarious blood supply, the
posteromedial LV papillary muscle is more susceptible to infarction than the anterolateral one.
Ventricular Free Wall Rupture
An infrequent but deadly complication, rupture of the LV free wall through a tear in the
necrotic myocardium may occur within the frst 2 weeks following MI. It is more common
188 chapter 7
among women and patients with a history of hypertension. Hemorrhage into the pericar-
dial space owing to LV free wall rupture results in rapid cardiac tamponade, in which blood
f lls the pericardial space and severely restricts ventricular f lling (see Chapter 14). Survival
is rare.

On occasion, a pseudoaneurysm results if rupture of the free wall is incomplete and held
in check by thrombus formation that “plugs” the hole in the myocardium. This situation is
the cardiac equivalent of a time bomb, because subsequent complete rupture into the pericar-
dium and tamponade could follow. If detected (usually by imaging studies), surgical repair
may prevent an otherwise disastrous outcome.

Ventricular Septal Rupture
This complication is analogous to LV free wall rupture, but the abnormal flow of blood is not
directed across the LV wall into the pericardium. Rather, blood is shunted across the ventricu-
lar septum from the left ventricle to the right ventricle, usually precipitating congestive heart
failure because of subsequent volume overload of the pulmonary capillaries. A loud systolic
murmur at the left sternal border, representing transseptal flow, is common in this situation.
Although each results in a systolic murmur, ventricular septal rupture can be differentiated
from acute mitral regurgitation by the location of the murmur (see Fig. 2-11), by Doppler
echocardiography, or by measuring the O, saturation of blood in the right-sided heart cham-
bers through a transvenous catheter. The O, content in the right ventricle is abnormally higher
than that in the right atrium if there is shunting of oxygenated blood from the left ventricle
across the septal defect.
True Ventricular Aneurysm

A late complication of MI, a true ventricular aneurysm, may come to attention weeks to
months after the acute infarction. It develops as the ventricular wall is weakened, but not
perforated, by the phagocytic clearance of necrotic tissue, and it results in a localized out-
ward bulge (dyskinesis) when the residual viable heart muscle contracts. Unlike the pseu-
doaneurysm described earlier, a true aneurysm does not involve communication between
the LV cavity and the pericardium, so that rupture and tamponade do not develop. Potential
complications of LV aneurysm include (1) thrombus formation within this region of stagnant
blood flow, serving as a source of emboli to peripheral organs; (2) ventricular arrhythmias
associated with the stretched myof bers; and (3) heart failure resulting from reduced forward
cardiac output, because some of the LV stroke volume is “wasted” by f lling the aneurysm
cavity during systole.

Clues to the presence of an LV aneurysm include persistent ST-segment elevations on the
ECG weeks after an acute ST-elevation MI and a bulge at the LV border on chest radiography.
The abnormality can be conf rmed by echocardiography or other imaging modalities.

Pericarditis

Acute pericarditis may occur in the early (in-hospital) post-MI period as inflammation
extends from the myocardium to the adjacent pericardium. Sharp pain, fever, and a peri-
cardial friction rub are typically present in this situation and help distinguish pericarditis
from the discomfort of recurrent myocardial ischemia (see Chapter 14). The symptoms usu-
ally promptly respond to aspirin therapy. Anticoagulants are relatively contraindicated in
MI complicated by pericarditis to avoid hemorrhage from the inflamed pericardial lining.
The frequency of MI-associated pericarditis has declined since the introduction of acute
reperfusion strategies, because those approaches limit the extent of myocardial damage and
inflammation.
Acute Gronary Syndromes 189
Dressler Syndrome
Dressler syndrome is now a rare form of pericarditis that can occur weeks following an
MI. The cause is unclear, but an immune process directed against damaged myocardial
tissue is suspected to play a role. The syndrome is heralded by fever, malaise, and sharp;
pleuritic chest pain typically accompanied by leukocytosis; an elevated erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate; and a pericardial effusion. Similar to other forms of acute pericarditis,
Dressler syndrome generally responds to aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
therapies.
Thromboembolism
Stasis of blood flow in regions of impaired LV contraction after an MI may result in intra-
cavity thrombus formation, especially when the infarction involves the LV apex or when a
true aneurysm has formed. Subsequent thromboemboli can result in infarction of peripheral
organs (e.g., a cerebrovascular event [stroke] caused by embolism to the brain).
RISK STRATIFICATION AND MANAGEMENT FOLLOWING MYOCARDIAL
INFARCTION
The most important predictor of post-MI outcome is the extent of LV dysfunction. Other fea-
tures that portend adverse outcomes include early recurrence of ischemic symptoms, a large
volume of residual myocardium still at risk because of severe underlying coronary disease,
and high-grade ventricular arrhythmias.

To identify patients at high risk for complications who may benef t from cardiac catheter-
ization and revascularization, exercise treadmill testing is often performed (unless the patient
has already undergone catheterization and corrective percutaneous revascularization for the
presenting coronary syndrome). Patients with signif cantly abnormal results, or those who
demonstrate an early spontaneous recurrence of angina, are customarily referred for cardiac
catheterization to def ne their coronary anatomy.

Standard postdischarge therapy for the long-term includes aspirin, a B-blocker, and a
high-intensity HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (statin). A P2Y,, platelet inhibitor is continued
for 12 months or longer. ACE inhibitors are prescribed to patients who have LV contrac-
tile dysfunction; an aldosterone antagonist should be considered in those with heart failure
symptoms. Rigorous attention to underlying cardiac risk factors, such as smoking, hyperten-
sion, and diabetes, is mandatory, and a formal exercise rehabilitation program often speeds
convalescence.

Patients who have an LV ejection fraction of <30% after MI are at high risk of sud-
den cardiac death and are candidates for prophylactic placement of an implantable
cardioverter—def brillator. Current guidelines recommend postponing such implantation
for at least 40 days post-MI because clinical trials have not shown a survival benef t at
earlier stages.

SUMMARY
e Acute coronary syndromes (ACSs) include unstable angina (UA), non—ST-segment eleva-
tion myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction

(STEMD).

° Most ACS episodes are precipitated by intracoronary thrombus formation at the site of ath-
erosclerotic plaque disruption.

° Distinctions among types of ACS are based on the severity of ischemia and whether myocar-
dial necrosis results: STEMI is associated with an occlusive thrombus and severe ischemia
190 Chapter 7
with necrosis, whereas ACSs without ST elevation (NSTEMI and UA) usually result from par-
tially occlusive thrombi with less intense ischemia; however, compared with UA, the insult
in NSTEMI is of suff cient magnitude to cause some myocardial necrosis.

e ACSs result in biochemical and mechanical changes that impair systolic contraction, decrease
myocardial compliance, and predispose to arrhythmias; infarction initiates an inflammatory
response that clears necrotic tissue and leads to scar formation.

° The diagnosis of specifc ACS relies on the patient’s history, ECG abnormalities, and the pres-
ence of specif c biomarkers in the serum (e.g., cardiac troponin T or troponin J).

e Acute treatment of UA and NSTEMI includes anti-ischemic therapy to restore the balance
between myocardial oxygen supply and demand (e.g., B-blockers, nitrates), antithrombotic
therapy to facilitate resolution of the intracoronary thrombus (e.g., aspirin, a P2Y,, ADP
receptor antagonist, an anticoagulant [e.g., intravenous or low molecular weight heparin],
and sometimes a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonist), and high-intensity statin therapy.

° Early coronary angiography, with subsequent coronary revascularization, is benef cial for UA
or NSTEMI patients with high-risk features.

e Acute treatment of STEMI includes rapid coronary reperfusion, ideally with percutaneous
catheter-based intervention if available or else f brinolytic therapy.

e Other important therapies for STEMI include antiplatelet therapy (aspirin, P2Y,, receptor
antagonist), an anticoagulant, a B-blocker, sometimes nitrate therapy, and a statin; an ACE
inhibitor is frequently appropriate.

° Potential complications of infarction include arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular tachycardia and
f brillation, and supraventricular tachycardias) and conduction blocks (atrioventricular
blocks and bundle branch blocks).

e Heart failure or cardiogenic shock may develop because of ventricular dysfunction or
mechanical complications (e.g., acute mitral regurgitation or ventricular septal defect); wall
motion abnormalities of the infarcted segment may predispose to thrombus formation.

° Right ventricular infarction results in signs of right heart failure out of proportion to left heart
failure, often with intravascular volume sensitivity and hypotension.

e Standard pharmacologic therapy following discharge from the hospital after an ACS includes
measures to reduce the risks of thrombosis (aspirin and a P2Y,, receptor antagonist), recur-
rent ischemia (a B-blocker), progressive atherosclerosis (high-intensity statin), and adverse
ventricular remodeling (an ACE inhibitor, especially if left ventricular [LV] dysfunction is
present).

e Adding an aldosterone antagonist should be considered for patients with heart failure.

° Systemic anticoagulation with warfarin is indicated if an intraventricular thrombus, a large
akinetic segment, or atrial f brillation is present.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Frederick Schoen, MD, for his helpful suggestions. Contributors to previ-

ous editions of this chapter were June-Wha Rhee, MD; Haley Naik, MD; Anurag Gupta, MD;

J. G. Fletcher, MD; William Carlson, MD; and Patrick T. O’Gara, MD.

Additional Reading

Giugliano RP, Braunwald E. The year in non-ST-segment Jneid H, Anderson JL, Wright RS, et al. 2012 ACCF/ AHA
elevation acute coronary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. Focused update of the guideline for the management of
2014;63:201—214. patients with unstable angina/non-ST-elevation myo-

Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ cardial infarction: A report of the American College of
ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients With Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart Association
Non-ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes: A report Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation.
of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart 2012;126:875—910.
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. Mega JL, Simon T, Collet JP, et al. Reduced function CYP2C19
2014; 130:e344-0426. genotype and risk of adverse clinical outcomes among
Acute Goronary Syndromes 191
patients treated with clopidogrel predominately for PCI: a stents in acute myocardial infarction). J Am Coll Cardiol.
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2010;304:1821—1830. 2014;63:15—20.

O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/ AHA Cavender MA and Sabatine MS. Bivalirudin versus heparin in
Guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial patients planned for percutaneous coronary intervention:
infarction: Executive summary: a report of the American a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet.
College of Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart 2014;384:599-606.

Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. Stone NJ, Robinson J, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/ AHA
2013;127:529-555. guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce

Stone GW, Clayton T, Deliargyris EN, et al. Reduction atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: A report
in cardiac mortality with bivalirudin in patients with on the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart
and without major bleeding: The HORIZONS-AMI trial Association task force on practice guidelines. J Am Coll
(harmonizing outcomes with revascularization and Cardiol. 2014;63:2889-934.
.
¥ 1g —
mi
fl
Valvular Heart Disease “
rs - ' * j)
Elizabeth Ryznar .
Patrick T. O'Gara Jy
Leonard S. Lilly
4 .
——
Chapter Outline T his chapter describes the pathophysiologic abnor-
malities in patients with common valvular heart dis-
Mitral Nalve Disease eases. Each condition is discussed separately because
Mtral Stenosis a a :
Mitral Recurgitation unifying principles do not govern the behavior of all ste-
Mtral Valve Prolapse notic or regurgitant valves. Effective patient management
Aortic Valve Disease requires accurate identif cation of the valve lesion, a deter-
Aortic Stenosis mination of its severity, and a clear understanding of the
SOIC Nepean pathophysiologic consequences and natural history of the
ns e Disease condition.
i nosi
a The evaluation of a patient with suspected valvular
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Palinciic Waive TRecisc disease begins at the bedside with a careful history and
Pulmonic Stenosis physical examination from which the trained clinician can
Pulmonic Regurgitation usually identify the type of abnormality present. Defni-
i . . rn cat echocardiography (TIE), which allows for staging of disease
Pathogenesis . ; a . oor .
Ginical- Manifestations severity. In selected patients, additional investigation with
ST exercise testing or cardiac catheterization may be neces-
Prevention sary to fully defne the signifcance of the condition and
guide therapy.
Management of patients with heart valve disease often
involves serial clinical and echocardiographic assessments.
Pharmacologic therapy is sometimes prescribed for sympto-
matic improvement, but recognition of timely indications for
valve repair or replacement is essential, as will be described
192
