ae
kd
The Gardiomyopathies Wf
P. Connor Johnson f (
G. William Dec Fy
Leonard S. Lilly
< .
/_
—
Chapter Outline C ardiomyopathies are a diverse set of heart muscle disor-
; / ders that cause mechanical and/or electrical dysfunction
Dilated Cantiomyopathy of the myocardium. Excluded from the def nition of this group
Friology : : : : :
Pathology of diseases is heart muscle impairment resulting from other
Pathophysiology specif c cardiovascular disorders such as hypertension, valvular
Ginical Hndings abnormalities, or congenital heart disease. Gardiomyopathies
Physical Examination often result in inappropriate ventricular hypertrophy or dilata-
Dagnostic studies tion, and progressive heart failure and cardiovascular death are
bie . common end manifestations. These conditions can involve the
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy .
Hiology heart alone or may be a component of a systemic syndrome.
Pathology Cardiomyopathies can be classifed into three main types
Pathophysiology based on the anatomic appearance and abnormal physiology
Cinical Findings of the left ventricle (LV) (Fig. 10-1). Dilated cardiomyopathy
i : | : : with impaired systolic contractile function; hypertrophic cardi-
eatmen ;
Prognosis omyopathy (HCW), by an abnormally thickened ventricular wall
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy with abnormal diastolic relaxation but usually intact systolic
Pathophysiology function; and restrictive cardiomyopathy, by an abnormally
Cinical Findings stiffened myocardium (because of fbrosis or an inf ltrative
Physical Examination process) leading to impaired diastolic relaxation, but systolic
DETAR MYT contractile function is typically normal or near normal.
Treatment
Other Forms of Cardiomyopathy
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
‘tiolog
Aorta oF
LA
Dilated LV
with minimal
LV hypertrophy
Normal Dilated
A B cardiomyopathy
Marked LV Infiltrated or
hypertrophy fibrotic LV
Hypertrophic Res tric tive
Cc cardiomyopathy D cardiomyopathy
HGURE10-1. Anatomic appearance of the cardiomyopathies (CVPs). A. Normal heart demonstrating left
ventricle (LV) and left atrium (LA). B. Dilated CVP is characterized by ventricular enlargement with only mildly
increased thickness. C Hypertrophic GVP demonstrates marked ventricular hypertrophy, either asymmetrically,
or symmetrically (as drawn here). D. Restrictive GVP is caused by inf Itration or fbrosis of the ventricles,
usually without chamber enlargement. LA enlargement is common to all three types of VP.
TABLE 10-1
Idiopathic
Familial (genetic)
Inf ammatory
Infectious (especially viral)
Noninfectious
Cnnective tissue diseases
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Sarcoidosis
Toxic
Chronic alcohol ingestion
Chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., doxorubicin, trastuzumab)
Metabolic
Hypothyroidism
Chronic hypocalcemia or hypophosphat emia
Neuromuscular
Miscular or myotonic dystrophy
a
The Gardiomyopathies 251
ingestion, the peripartum state, specifc gene mutations, and exposure to potentially cardio-
toxic antineoplastic agents, such as doxorubicin.

Acute viral myocarditis generally afflicts young, previously healthy people. Common respon-
sible infecting organisms include coxsackievirus group B, parvovirus B19, and adenovirus,
among many others. Viral myocarditis is usually a self-limited illness with full recovery, but for
unknown reasons, some patients progress to DCM. It is hypothesized that myocardial destruction
and fbrosis result from immune-mediated injury triggered by viral constituents. Nonetheless,
immunosuppressive drugs have not been shown to improve the prognosis of this condition.
Transvenous ventricular biopsy during acute myocarditis may demonstrate active inflammation,
but specif c viral genomic sequences have been demonstrated in only a minority of patients.

DCM develops in a small number of people who consume alcoholic beverages excessively
and chronically. Although the pathogenesis of the condition is unknown, ethanol is thought
to impair cellular function by impacting mitochondrial oxidative function, myof lament pro-
tein synthesis, cytosolic calcium levels, and myocyte apoptosis. While its clinical presentation
and histologic features are similar to those of other dilated cardiomyopathies, alcoholic car-
diomyopathy is important to identify because it is potentially reversible; cessation of ethanol
consumption can lead to dramatic recovery of ventricular function.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a form of DCM that presents with heart failure symptoms
between the last month of pregnancy and up to 6 months postpartum. Risk factors include
older maternal age, being African American, and having multiple pregnancies. A unifying
etiology of this condition has not yet been identifed. Ventricular function returns to normal
in approximately 50% of affected women in the months following pregnancy, but recurrences
of DCM with subsequent pregnancies have been reported.

Other potentially reversible causes of DCM include toxic drug exposures, metabolic abnor-
malities (such as hypothyroidism), and certain inflammatory etiologies, including sarcoidosis
and connective tissue diseases.

Several familial forms of DCM have been identif ed and are believed to be responsible for
20% to 30% of what were once classif ed as idiopathic DCM. Autosomal dominant, autosomal
recessive, X-linked, and mitochondrial patterns of inheritance have been described, leading
to defects in contractile force generation, force transmission, energy production, and myocyte
viability. Identifed mutations occur in genes that code for cardiac cytoskeletal, myof brillar,
and nuclear membrane proteins (Table 10-2).

Protein Mutations Identif ed in DOV Mutations Identif ed in HOM
Gytoskeletal proteins
Desmin V
Dystrophin V
Myosin-binding protein C V V
Sarcoglycans V
Titin V V
Myof brillar proteins
B-Myosin heavy chain V V
Cardiac troponin T V V
Cardiac troponin I V V
Cardiac troponin C V V
a.-Tropomyosin V V
Essential myosin light chain V
Cardiac actin v V
Nuclear membrane protein
lamin AC V
ee
252 chapter 10
Pathology _RV,
Marked enlargement of all four cardiac ~ Ss .
chambers is typical of DCM (Fig. 10-2), - ‘ Cc (2am
although sometimes the disease is limited q LES me = Lt SRS
to the left or right side of the heart. The ” , Zz 4 Ye Tt ak
thickness of the ventricular walls may be 8 4. ‘ Ia f } “Say BAY
increased, but chamber dilatation is out of - 4 pus ees _
proportion to any concentric hypertrophy. Pm, Aad fa
Microscopically, there is evidence of myo- ral |
cyte degeneration with irregular hypertro- ;
phy and atrophy of myof bers. Interstitial FIGURE 10-2. Transverse sections of a normal heart
. a, . (right) and a heart from a patient with dilated
and perivascular f brosis is often extensive. cardiomyopathy (DCM). In the DOMspecimen, there is
biventricular dilatation without a proportional increase
in wall thickness. LV left ventricle; RV right ventricle.
Pathophysiology (Modif ed from Emmanouilides GC ed. Mbss and Adams’
Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents.
The hallmark of DCM is ventricular dila- sth eq, Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
tation with decreased contractile function 1995:86.)
(Fig. 10-3). Most often in DCM, both ven-
tricles are impaired, but sometimes dysfunction is limited to the LV and even less commonly
to the right ventricle (RV).

As ventricular stroke volume and cardiac output decline because of impaired myocyte
contractility, two compensatory effects are activated: (1) the Frank—Starling mechanism,
in which the elevated ventricular diastolic volume increases the stretch of the myof bers,
thereby increasing the subsequent stroke volume; and (2) neurohormonal activation, initially
mediated by the sympathetic nervous system (see Chapter 9). The latter contributes to an
increased heart rate and contractility, which help to buffer the fall in cardiac output. These
compensations may render the patient asymptomatic during the early stages of ventricular
dysfunction; however, as progressive myocyte degeneration and volume overload ensue, clini-
cal symptoms of heart failure develop.

=
HGURE10-3. Pathophysiology of dilated cardiomyopathy. The reduced ventricular stroke volume results in
decreased forward cardiac output and increased ventricular fling pressures. The listed clinical manifestations
follow. JVD, jugular venous distention.
The Gardiomyopathies 253

With a persistent reduction of cardiac output, the decline in renal blood flow prompts the
kidneys to increase secretion of renin. This activation of the renin—angiotensin—aldosterone
axis increases peripheral vascular resistance (mediated through angiotensin II) and intravas-
cular volume (because of increased aldosterone). As described in Chapter 9, these effects are
also initially helpful in buffering the fall in cardiac output.

Ultimately, however, the “compensatory” effects of neurohormonal activation prove
detrimental. Arteriolar vasoconstriction and increased systemic resistance render it more dif-
f cult for the LV to eject blood in the forward direction, and the rise in intravascular volume
further burdens the ventricles, resulting in pulmonary and systemic congestion. In addition,
chronically elevated levels of angiotensin II and aldosterone directly contribute to pathologic
myocardial remodeling and f brosis.

As the cardiomyopathic process causes the ventricles to enlarge over time, the mitral and
tricuspid valves may fail to coapt properly in systole, and valvular regurgitation ensues. This
regurgitation has three detrimental consequences: (1) excessive volume and pressure loads
are placed on the atria, causing them to dilate, often leading to atrial f brillation; (2) regur-
gitation of blood into the left atrium further decreases forward stroke volume into the aorta
and systemic circulation; and (3) when the regurgitant volume returns to the LV during each
diastole, an even greater volume load is presented to the dilated LV.

Cinical Findings
The clinical manifestations of DCM are those of congestive heart failure. The most com-
mon symptoms of low forward cardiac output include fatigue, light-headedness, and exer-
tional dyspnea associated with decreased tissue perfusion. Pulmonary congestion results in
dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, whereas chronic systemic venous
congestion causes ascites and peripheral edema. Because these symptoms may develop insid-
iously, the patient may complain only of recent weight gain (because of interstitial edema)
and shortness of breath on exertion.

Physical Examination
Signs of decreased cardiac output are often present and include cool extremities (owing to
peripheral vasoconstriction) and low arterial pressure. Pulmonary venous congestion results
in auscultatory rales (crackles), and basilar chest dullness to percussion may be present
because of pleural effusions. Cardiac examination shows an enlarged heart with leftward
displacement of the apical impulse. On auscultation, a third heart sound (S3) is common as a
sign of poor systolic function. The murmur of mitral valve regurgitation is often present as a
result of the signif cant left ventricular dilatation (see Chapter 8). If right ventricular heart fail-
ure has developed, signs of systemic venous congestion may include jugular vein distention,
hepatomegaly, ascites, and peripheral edema. Right ventricular enlargement and contractile
dysfunction are often accompanied by the murmur of tricuspid valve regurgitation.

Diagnostic Studies
The chest radiograph shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette. If heart failure has developed,
then pulmonary vascular redistribution, interstitial and alveolar edema, and pleural effusions
are evident (see Fig. 3-5).

The electrocardiogram (ECG) usually demonstrates atrial and ventricular enlargement.
Patchy fbrosis of the myof bers results in a variety of arrhythmias, most importantly atrial
fbrillation and ventricular tachycardia. Conduction defects (left or right bundle branch
block) are common. In addition, regions of dense myocardial f brosis may produce localized
Q waves, resembling the pattern of previous transmural myocardial infarction.
254 (chapter 10

Echocardiography in DCM typically demonstrates enlargement of the affected ventricle(s)
with little concentric hypertrophy, and global reduction of systolic ventricular function. Mitral
and/or tricuspid regurgitation is frequently detected due to ventricular dilatation.

Cardiac catheterization or CT angiography is often performed to determine whether coexis-
tent coronary artery disease is contributing to the impaired ventricular function. This is most
useful diagnostically in patients who have symptoms of angina or evidence of prior myocar-
dial infarction on the ECG. Typically, hemodynamic measurements show elevated right- and
left-sided diastolic pressures and diminished cardiac output. A transvenous biopsy of the RV
is sometimes performed in the catheterization laboratory, in an attempt to clarify the etiology
of the cardiomyopathy.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (described in Chapter 3) is often helpful in
the evaluation of DCM, particularly to assess for contributory myocardial inflammation
(myocarditis).

Treatment
The goal of therapy in DCM is to promote reverse remodeling of dilated ventricles, enhance
myocardial function, relieve symptoms, prevent complications, and improve long-term
survival. Thus, in addition to treating any identif ed underlying cause of DCM, therapeutic
considerations include those described in the following sections.

Medical Treatment of Heart Failure Symptoms
Approaches for the relief of vascular congestion and improvement in forward cardiac output
are the same as standard therapies for heart failure (see Chapter 9). Initial therapy typically
includes salt restriction and diuretics if volume overload is present, vasodilator therapy with
an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB),
and a /-blocker in hemodynamically stable patients. For patients with persistent symptoms,
the addition of an aldosterone antagonist should be considered. These measures have been
shown to improve symptoms and reduce mortality in patients with DCM.

Prevention and Treatment of Arrhythmias
Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are common in advanced DCM, and approximately 40%
of deaths in this condition result from ventricular tachycardia or f brillation. It is important to
maintain serum electrolytes (notably, potassium and magnesium) within their normal ranges,
especially during diuretic therapy, to avoid provoking serious arrhythmias. Studies have
shown that available antiarrhythmic drugs do not prevent death from ventricular arrhythmias
in DCM. In fact, when used in patients with poor LV function, many antiarrhythmic drugs
may worsen the rhythm disturbance. Amiodarone is the antiarrhythmic drug studied most
extensively in patients with DCM. Whereas there is no convincing evidence that it reduces
mortality from ventricular arrhythmias in DCM, it is the safest antiarrhythmic for treating
atrial f brillation and other supraventricular arrhythmias in this population. In contrast to
antiarrhythmic drugs, the placement of an implantable cardioverter—def brillator (ICD) does
reduce arrhythmic deaths in patients with DCM. Therefore, based on large-scale random-
ized trials, an ICD is recommended for patients with chronic symptomatic DCM and at least
moderately reduced systolic function (e.g., LV ejection fraction <35%), regardless of whether
ventricular arrhythmias have been detected.

Many patients with DCM have electrical conduction abnormalities that contribute to dyssyn-
chronous ventricular contraction and therefore reduced cardiac output. Electronic pacemakers
capable of stimulating both ventricles simultaneously have been devised to better coordi-
nate systolic contraction as an adjunct to medical therapy (termed cardiac resynchronization
The Gardiomyopathies 255
therapy, as described in Chapter 9). Demonstrated benef ts of this approach include improved
quality of life and exercise tolerance, fewer hospitalizations for heart failure, and reduced
mortality, particularly in those with pretreatment left bundle branch block or other conduc-
tion abnormalities with a markedly prolonged QRS duration.

Prevention of Thromboembolic Events
Patients with DCM are at increased risk of thromboembolic complications for reasons that include
(1) blood stasis in the ventricles resulting from poor systolic function, (2) stasis in the atria due to
chamber enlargement or atrial f brillation, and (3) systemic venous stasis because of poor circula-
tory flow. Peripheral venous or right ventricular thrombi may lead to pulmonary emboli, whereas
thromboemboli of left ventricular origin may lodge in a systemic artery, resulting in, for example,
cerebral, myocardial, or renal infarctions. In DCM with heart failure, systemic anticoagulation
should be considered for patients with a history of venous or systemic thromboembolism, atrial
f brillation, or those with left ventricular thrombi identif ed by cardiac imaging, especially those
that are mobile or protrude into the LV cavity (and are therefore more likely to embolize).

Qardiac Transplantation
In suitable highly symptomatic patients, cardiac transplantation offers a substantially better
5-year prognosis than do standard therapies for DCM described above. The 5- and 10-year
survival rates after transplantation are 74% and 55%, respectively. However, the scarcity of
donor hearts greatly limits the availability of this technique. As a result, other mechanical
options have been explored and continue to undergo experimental ref nements, including
ventricular assist devices and completely implanted artif cial hearts.

HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
With an incidence of about 1 of 500 in the general population, HCM is characterized by
left ventricular hypertrophy that is not caused by chronic pressure overload (i.e., not the
result of hypertension or aortic stenosis [AS]). Other terms used to describe this disease are
“hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy” and “idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis.”
In this condition, systolic LV contractile function is vigorous but the thickened muscle is stiff,
resulting in impaired ventricular relaxation and high diastolic pressures. HCM has received
notoriety in the lay press because it is the most common cardiac abnormality found in young
athletes in the United States who die suddenly during vigorous physical exertion.

Etiology
HCM is a familial disease in which inheritance follows an autosomal dominant pattern with
variable penetrance, and hundreds of mutations in several different genes have been impli-
cated. The proteins encoded by the responsible genes are all part of the sarcomere complex
and include B-myosin heavy chain (B-MHC), cardiac troponins, and myosin-binding protein C
(see Table 10-2). The incorporation of these mutated peptides into the sarcomere is thought to
cause impaired contractile function. The resultant increase in myocyte stress is then hypoth-
esized to lead to compensatory hypertrophy and proliferation of f broblasts.

The pathophysiology and natural history of familial HCM are variable and appear related to
particular mutations within the disease-causing gene, rather than the actual gene involved. In
fact, it has been shown that the precise genetic mutation determines the age of onset of hypertro-
phy, the extent and pattern of cardiac remodeling, and the person’s risk of developing symptom-
atic heart failure or sudden death. For example, mutations in the B-MHC gene that alter electrical
charge in the encoded protein are associated with worse prognoses than other mutations.
256 (chapter 10
Pathology
; ; ne
Although hypertrophy in HCM may involve = :
any portion of the ventricles, asymmet- . ’ raf .
ric hypertrophy of the ventricular sep- oad AX , 9 =
tum (Fig. 10-4) is most commonly found f 4 a ee — )
(approximately 90% of cases). Less often, Saf es \ ae _
. . ~ : seh.
the hypertrophy involves the ventricular =~ kK. as of ’
walls symmetrically or is localized to the MEX ae '
apex or mid-region of the LV. . me iP fo eee »
Unlike ventricular hypertrophy resulting =a} WT! ro | ee ll r
from hypertension in which the myocytes . aN ie 5 \\ 1), ‘iS 2
enlarge uniformly and remain orderly, the oh} cata YD | &
histology of HCM is unusual. The myocardial es - 1 * } sins
fbers are in a pattern of extensive disarray ME - aa ) Fae e
(Fig. 10-5). Short, wide, hypertrophied f bers Soe aa ray ‘
are oriented in chaotic directions and are sur- 1y ee] i? ; : ff
rounded by numerous cardiac f broblasts and me
extracellular matrix. This myocyte disarray Ivs Be ed ; Foy
and fbrosis are characteristic of HCM and cs a Hg
play a role in the abnormal diastolic stiffness oo ad
and the arrhythmias common to this disorder. ERE
ass etme MOM T A wir : ,' ,
Pathophysiology
HGURE 10-4. Postmortem heart specimen from a
ventricular hypertrophy that reduces the left ventricular hypertrophy is present, especially of the
compliance and diastolic relaxation prop- interventricular septum (IVS).
erties of the chamber, such that flling
becomes impaired (Fig. 10-6). Patients who have asymmetric hypertrophy of the proximal
interventricular septum may display additional f ndings related to transient obstruction of left
ventricular outflow during systole. It is useful to consider the pathophysiology of HCM based
on whether such systolic outflow tract obstruction is present.
. : 4 ’ e ; . vie We V7 Mee hea \ >a
r , : 4 = : $ , . ’ ; f ae 214 | A i i;
. é -'s ; f j : t J ¥ Wr ; ; * y F de ei ~ ‘ No ,
f ' 1 net ‘ " 5 ae | i722 4 Saw Se
Nga A, \ | yf ‘) = ae ht
rs ’ ole SW; . ¢ ss , Lea ~ - ed S <) |
Peps ely i) ene Sah 7: NN sy} . 4)\) mt he, Pe Pace bed
: \ : 5 ’ r : & mi R : ~~ SN os PN
' . ~ S ‘. P t ‘ ; a > es ‘ ; op Mi : = 4 ” im Ry t
\ a v : 4 ‘ 7 Ve ake, ro.: aw t ie |
: - } . / | I ee ne | : N i} . vt ys y ‘Ss we f Ki \ : |
A B Cc
HGURE 10-5. Light microscopy of hypertrophic myocardium. A. Normal myocardium. B Hypertrophied
myocytes in a patient with valvular heart disease. C Myocyte disarray with fbrosis in a patient with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
The Gardiomyopathies 257

HGURE 10-6. Pathophysiology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The disarrayed and hypertrophied myocytes

may lead to ventricular arrhythmias (which can cause syncope or sudden death) and impaired diastolic left

ventricular (LV) relaxation (which causes elevated LV filling pressures and dyspnea). If dynamic LV outf ow

obstruction is present, mitral regurgitation often accompanies it (which contributes to dyspnea), and the

impaired ability to raise cardiac output with exertion can lead to exertional syncope. The thickened LV wall,

and increased systolic pressure associated with outf ow tract obstruction, each contribute to increased

myocardial oxygen consumption (MVO,) and can precipitate angina. CO, cardiac output; LVEDP, LV end-diastolic

pressure; LVH, LVhypertrophy.

HOM without Outf ow Tract Obstruction
Although systolic contraction of the LV is usually vigorous in HCM, hypertrophy of the walls
results in increased stiffness and impaired relaxation of the chamber. The reduced ventricular
compliance alters the normal pressure—volume relationship, causing the passive diastolic f Il-
ing curve to shift upward (see Fig. 9-7B). The associated rise in diastolic LV pressure is trans-
mitted backward, leading to elevated left atrial, pulmonary venous, and pulmonary capillary
pressures. Dyspnea, especially during exertion, is thus a common symptom in this disorder.

HOM with Outf ow Obstruction
Approximately one third of patients with HCM manifest systolic outflow tract obstruction.
The mechanism of systolic obstruction involves abnormal motion of the anterior mitral valve
leaflet toward the LV outflow tract where the thickened septum protrudes (Fig. 10-7). The
process is explained as follows: (1) during ventricular contraction, ejection of blood toward
the aortic valve is more rapid than usual, because it must flow through an outflow tract that is
narrowed by the thickened septum; (2) this rapid flow creates Venturi forces that abnormally
draw the anterior mitral leaflet toward the septum during contraction; and (3) the anterior
mitral leaflet approaches and abuts the hypertrophied septum, causing transient obstruction
of blood flow into the aorta.

In patients with outflow obstruction, elevated left atrial and pulmonary capillary wedge
pressures result from both the decreased ventricular compliance and the outflow obstruc-
tion during contraction. During systolic obstruction, a pressure gradient develops between
the main body of the LV and the outflow tract distal to the obstruction (see Fig. 10-7).
258 chapter 10
A re ——,
Aorta
+ MR
\
\: [
“
—
Septum IBY
Early systole Mid-to-late
systole
HGURE10-7. Pathophysiology of left ventricular (LV) outf ow obstruction and mitral regurgitation
(MR) in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Left panel. The LV outf ow tract is abnormally narrowed between the
hypertrophied interventricular septum and the anterior leaf et of the mitral valve (AML). It is thought that the
rapid ejection velocity through the narrowed tract in early systole draws the AML toward the septum (short red
arrow). Right panel. As the mitral valve anterior leaf et abnormally moves toward, and contacts, the septum,
outf ow into the aorta is transiently obstructed. Because the mitral leaf ets do not coapt normally in systole,
MR also results (long red arrow).
The elevated ventricular systolic pressure increases wall stress and myocardial oxygen con-
sumption, which can result in angina (see Fig. 10-6). In addition, because obstruction is
caused by abnormal motion of the anterior mitral leaflet toward the septum (and therefore
away from the posterior mitral leaflet), the mitral valve does not close properly during systole,
and mitral regurgitation may result. Such regurgitation further elevates left atrial and pulmo-
nary venous pressures and may worsen symptoms of dyspnea, as well as contribute to the
development of atrial f brillation.

The systolic pressure gradient observed in obstructive HCM is dynamic in that its magni-
tude varies during contraction and depends, at any given time, on the distance between the
anterior leaflet of the mitral valve and the hypertrophied septum. Situations that decrease
LV cavity size (e.g., reduced venous return owing to intravascular volume depletion) bring
the mitral leaflet and septum into closer proximity and promote obstruction. Conversely,
conditions that enlarge the LV (e.g., augmented intravascular volume) increase the distance
between the anterior mitral leaflet and septum and reduce the obstruction. Positive inotropic
drugs (which augment the force of contraction; see Chapter 17) also force the mitral leaflet
and septum into closer proximity and contribute to obstruction, whereas negative inotropic
drugs (e.g., B-blockers, verapamil) have the opposite effect.

Although dynamic systolic outflow tract obstruction creates an impressive murmur and
receives great attention, the symptoms of obstructive HCM appear to primarily stem from
the increased LV stiffness and diastolic dysfunction that are also present in the nonob-
structive form.

Cinical Findings
The symptoms of HCM vary widely in affected individuals, from none to marked physical
limitations (see Fig. 10-6). The average age of presentation is the mid-20s.

The most frequent symptom is dyspnea owing to elevated diastolic LV (and therefore
pulmonary capillary) pressure. This symptom is further exacerbated by the high systolic LV
pressure and mitral regurgitation found in patients with outflow tract obstruction.
The Gardiomyopathies 259

Angina is often described by patients with HCM, even in the absence of obstructive
coronary artery disease. Myocardial ischemia may be contributed to by (1) the high oxygen
demand of the increased muscle mass and (2) the narrowed small branches of the coronary
arteries within the hypertrophied ventricular wall. If outflow tract obstruction is present,
the high systolic ventricular pressure increases myocardial oxygen demand because of the
increased wall stress and contributes to ischemia.

Syncope in HCM may result from cardiac arrhythmias that arise because of the structurally
abnormal myof bers. In patients with outflow tract obstruction, syncope may also be induced
by exertion, when the pressure gradient is made worse by the increased force of contraction,
thereby causing a transient fall in cardiac output. Orthostatic light-headedness is also com-
mon in patients with outflow tract obstruction. This occurs because venous return to the
heart is reduced on standing by the gravitational pooling of blood in the lower extremities.
The LV thus decreases in size and outflow tract obstruction intensif es, transiently reducing
cardiac output and cerebral perfusion.

When arrhythmias occur, symptoms of HCM may be exacerbated. For example, atrial
f brillation is not well tolerated because the loss of the normal atrial “kick” further impairs
diastolic f lling and can therefore worsen symptoms of pulmonary congestion. Of greatest con-
cern, the frst clinical manifestation of HCM may be ventricular f brillation, resulting in sud-
den cardiac death, particularly in young adults with HCM during strenuous physical exertion.
Risk factors for sudden death among patients with HCM include a history of syncope, a family
history of sudden death, certain high-risk HCM mutations, and extreme hypertrophy of the LV
wall (>30 mm in thickness).

Physical Examination
A patient with a mild form of HCM may have a normal cardiac examination. Otherwise, a
common fnding is a fourth heart sound (S,), generated by left atrial contraction into the
stiffened LV (see Chapter 2). The forceful atrial contraction may also result in a palpable pre-
systolic impulse over the cardiac apex (a “double apical impulse”).

Other fndings are typical in patients with systolic outflow obstruction. The carotid
pulse rises briskly in early systole but then quickly declines as obstruction to cardiac out-
flow appears. The characteristic systolic murmur of LV outflow obstruction is rough and
crescendo—decrescendo in shape, heard best at the left lower sternal border (in proximity to
the turbulent flow through the narrowed outflow tract), and unlike AS, does not typically
radiate to the carotid arteries. In addition, as the stethoscope is moved toward the apex,
the holosystolic blowing murmur of accompanying mitral regurgitation may be auscultated.
Although the LV outflow obstruction murmur may be soft at rest, bedside maneuvers that
alter preload and afterload can dramatically increase its intensity and help differentiate this
murmur from other conditions, such as AS (Table 10-3).

A commonly used technique in this regard is the Valsalva maneuver, produced by ask-
ing the patient to “bear down” (technically defned as forceful exhalation with the nose,
mouth, and glottis closed). The Valsalva maneuver increases intrathoracic pressure, which
decreases venous return to the heart and transiently reduces LV size. This action brings the

Valsalva Squatting Standing
HOM murmur t 1 t
AS murmur 1 t |
OOS
HOM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; AS, aortic stenosis.
260 chapter 10
hypertrophied septum and anterior leaflet of the mitral valve into closer proximity, creating
greater obstruction to forward flow. Thus, during Valsalva, the murmur of HCM increases in
intensity. In contrast, the murmur of AS decreases in intensity during Valsalva because of the
reduced flow across the stenotic valve.

Conversely, a change from standing to a squatting position suddenly augments venous
return to the heart (which increases preload) while simultaneously increasing the systemic
vascular resistance. The increased preload raises the stroke volume and therefore causes the
murmur of AS to become louder. In contrast, the transient increase in LV size during squatting
reduces the LV outflow tract obstruction in HCM and softens the intensity of that murmur.
Sudden standing from a squatting position has the opposite effect on each of these murmurs
(see Table 10-3).

Diagnostic Studies

The ECG typically shows left ventricular hypertrophy and left atrial enlargement. Prominent
Q waves are common in the inferior and lateral leads, representing amplif ed forces of initial
depolarization of the hypertrophied septum directed away from those leads. In some patients,
diffuse T wave inversions are present, which can predate clinical, echocardiographic, or other
electrocardiographic manifestations of HCM. Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are frequent,
especially atrial f brillation. Ventricular arrhythmias are particularly ominous because they
may herald ventricular f brillation and sudden death, even in previously asymptomatic
patients.

Echocardiography is very helpful in the evaluation of HCM. The degree of LV hypertrophy
can be measured and regions of asymmetrical wall thickness readily identif ed. Signs of left
ventricular outflow obstruction may also be demonstrated and include abnormal anterior
motion of the mitral valve as it is drawn toward the hypertrophied septum during systole,
and partial closure of the aortic valve in midsystole as flow across it is transiently obstructed.
Doppler recordings during echocardiography accurately measure the outflow pressure gradi-
ent and quantify any associated mitral regurgitation. Children and adolescents with appar-
ently mild HCM should undergo serial echocardiographic assessment over time, because the
degree of hypertrophy may increase during puberty and early adulthood.

Cardiac catheterization is reserved for patients for whom the diagnosis is uncertain or
if percutaneous septal ablation (described in the “Treatment” section) is planned. The
major feature in patients with obstruction is the fnding of a pressure gradient within the
outflow portion of the LV, either at rest or during maneuvers that transiently reduce LV size
and promote outflow tract obstruction. Myocardial biopsy at the time of catheterization
is not necessary because histologic fndings do not predict disease severity or long-term
prognosis.

Finally, genetic testing can be helpful in establishing, or excluding, the diagnosis of HCM
in family members of an affected patient when a specifc mutation in that family has been
identif ed.

Treatment

B-Blockers are standard therapy for HCM because they (1) reduce myocardial oxygen demand
by slowing the heart rate and the force of contraction (and therefore diminish angina and dys-
pnea); (2) lessen any LV outflow gradient during exercise by reducing the force of contraction
(allowing the chamber size to increase, thus separating the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve
from the ventricular septum); (3) increase passive diastolic ventricular f lling time owing to
the decreased heart rate; and (4) decrease the frequency of ventricular ectopic beats. Despite
their antiarrhythmic effect, B-blockers do not prevent sudden arrhythmic death in this condi-
tion, nor have they been shown to slow disease progression.
The Gardiomyopathies 261

Certain calcium channel antagonists (e.g., verapamil) may have benef cial effects on
ventricular relaxation and flling and are sometimes useful in improving exercise capacity in
patients who fail to respond to B-blockers. Patients who develop pulmonary congestion may
benef t from mild diuretic therapy, but these drugs must be administered cautiously to avoid
volume depletion; reduced intravascular volume decreases LV size and could exacerbate out-
flow tract obstruction. Vasodilators (including nitrates) similarly reduce LV size and should
be avoided.

Atrial f brillation is poorly tolerated in HCM and should be controlled aggressively, most
commonly with antiarrhythmic drugs. Effective and useful antiarrhythmic drugs for atrial
f brillation in HCM include amiodarone and disopyramide (a class IA antiarrhythmic drug that
also possesses negative inotropic properties that may help reduce LV outflow tract obstruc-
tion; see Chapter 17). Digitalis should be avoided in HCM because its positive inotropic effect
increases the force of contraction and can worsen LV outflow tract obstruction.

Sudden cardiac death has a propensity to occur in patients with HCM in association with
physical exertion; therefore, strenuous exercise and competitive sports should be avoided.
Sudden death in this syndrome is almost always caused by ventricular tachycardia or f bril-
lation. Although amiodarone may reduce the frequency of ventricular arrhythmias, HCM
patients who are at high risk (i.e., a family history of sudden death, extreme hypertrophy
with ventricular wall thickness >30 mm, unexplained prior syncopal episodes, history of
high-grade ventricular tachyarrythmias) should receive an ICD. ICD therapy is life saving for
both primary prevention in such patients, and for HCM patients who have already survived
a cardiac arrest.

Some studies have shown clinical improvement when patients with the obstructive form
of HCM are treated with a dual-chamber permanent pacemaker, the two electrodes of which
are placed in the right atrium and RV. The LV outflow gradient may become reduced by this
procedure, possibly by altering the normal sequence of ventricular contraction, such that
septal—mitral valve apposition becomes less prominent. However, this technique seems to be
useful for only a small percentage of markedly symptomatic patients.

Surgical therapy (myomectomy) is considered for patients whose symptoms do not respond
adequately to pharmacologic therapy. This procedure involves excision of portions of the
hypertrophied septal muscle mass and usually improves outflow tract obstruction, symptoms,
and exercise capacity. Myomectomy is the “gold standard” approach to treatment of refractory
symptoms in this condition. A less invasive alternative in select patients is percutaneous sep-
tal ablation, performed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, in which ethanol is injected
directly into the frst major septal coronary artery (a branch of the left anterior descending
artery), causing a small, controlled myocardial infarction. The desired and often achieved
result is reduction of septal thickness and improvement in outflow tract obstruction.

Theoretically, infective endocarditis could develop in patients with the obstructive form of
HCM because of turbulent blood flow through the LV outflow tract and the associated mitral
regurgitation. However, that is rare and routine antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of endo-
carditis prior to invasive dental work is not recommended in this condition by current U.S.
guidelines (see Chapter 8).

Finally, genetic counseling should be provided to all patients with HCM. Because it is an
autosomal dominant disease, children of affected persons have a 50% chance of inheriting
the abnormal gene. First-degree relatives of patients with HCM should be screened by physi-
cal examination, electrocardiography, echocardiography, and sometimes genetic testing. Even
asymptomatic HCM patients are at risk of complications, including sudden death.

Prognosis
The incidence of sudden death in HCM is 2% to 4% per year in adults and 4% to 6%
in children and adolescents. It has become clear that different mutations produce vastly
262 Chapter 10
different phenotypes. Some cause extreme hypertrophy in childhood without any clinical
symptoms until the occurrence of sudden death; others present later in life with heart fail-
ure symptoms. Most mutations produce only mild hypertrophy and are associated with a
normal life expectancy.

RESTRICITVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
The restrictive cardiomyopathies are less common than DCM and HCM. They are character-
ized by abnormally rigid (but not necessarily thickened) ventricles with impaired diastolic
f lling but usually normal, or near normal, systolic function. This condition results from either
(1) f brosis or scarring of the endomyocardium or (2) inf Itration of the myocardium by an
abnormal substance (Table 10-4).

The most common recognized cause of restrictive cardiomyopathy in nontropical countries
is amyloidosis. In this systemic disease, insoluble misfolded amyloid fbrils deposit within
tissues, including the heart, causing organ dysfunction. Amyloid deposition is diagnosed his-
tologically by the Congo red stain, which displays amyloid f brils with a characteristic green
birefringence under polarized light.

Amyloid fbrils can develop from several different proteins that distinguish the categories
of disease. Primary amyloidosis is caused by deposition of immunoglobulin light chain AL
fragments secreted by a plasma cell tumor (usually, multiple myeloma). In contrast, second-
ary amyloidosis is characterized by the presence of AA amyloid (derived from the inflam-
matory marker serum amyloid A) in a variety of chronic inflammatory conditions, such as
rheumatoid arthritis. Less common is hereditary amyloidosis, an autosomal dominant condi-
tion in which amyloid fbrils form from point mutations in the protein transthyretin. Senile
amyloidosis refers to a condition in the elderly, in which amyloid deposits, derived from
transthyretin or other proteins, are found scattered throughout the vascular system, muscles,
kidney, and lung. In each form of amyloidosis, cardiac involvement is marked by deposition
of extracellular amyloid between myocardial f bers in the atria and ventricles, in the coronary
arteries and veins, and in the heart valves.

Clinical manifestations of cardiac involvement are most common in the primary (AL) form
of amyloidosis and typically relate to the development of restrictive cardiomyopathy because
of the inf Itrating amyloid protein. Diastolic dysfunction is the prominent cardiac abnormal-
ity; systolic dysfunction may also develop later in the disease. Orthostatic hypotension is

Noninf Itrative
Idiopathic
Scleroderma
Inf Itrative
Amyloidosis
Sarcoidosis
Storage diseases
Hemochromatosis
Gycogen storage diseases
Endomyocardial disease

Endomyocardial f brosis

Hypereosinophilic syndrome

Metastatic tumors

Radiation therapy
ee
The Gardiomyopathies 263
present in about 10% of patients, likely contributed to by amyloid deposition in the auto-
nomic nervous system and peripheral blood vessels. Inf ltration of amyloid into the cardiac
conduction system can cause arrhythmias and conduction impairments, which can result in
syncope or sudden death.

Pathophysiology
Reduced compliance of the ventricles in restrictive cardiomyopathy, whether due to inf I-
tration or fbrosis, results in an upward shift of the passive ventricular fling curve (see
Fig. 9-7B), leading to abnormally high diastolic pressures. This has two major consequences:
(1) elevated systemic and pulmonary venous pressures, with signs of right- and left-sided
vascular congestion, and (2) reduced ventricular cavity size with decreased fling, stroke
volume, and cardiac output.

Cinical Findings
It follows from the underlying pathophysiology that signs of left- and right-sided heart failure
are expected (Fig. 10-8). Decreased cardiac output is manifested by fatigue and decreased
exercise tolerance. Systemic congestion (often more prominent than pulmonary congestion
in this syndrome) leads to jugular venous distention, peripheral edema, and ascites with a
large, tender liver. Arrhythmias, including atrial f brillation, are common. Inf Itrative etiolo-
gies that involve the cardiac conduction system can cause conduction blocks (described in
Chapter 12).

Physical Examination
Signs of congestive heart failure are often present, including pulmonary rales, distended neck
veins, ascites, and peripheral edema. Similar to constrictive pericarditis (see Chapter 14),
jugular venous distention may paradoxically worsen with inspiration (the Kussmaul sign)
because the stiffened RV cannot accommodate the increased venous return.

Diagnostic Studies
The chest radiograph usually shows a normal-sized heart with signs of pulmonary congestion.
The ECG often displays nonspecifc ST and T wave abnormalities; conduction disturbances
such as atrioventricular block or a bundle branch block may be present.
HGURE10-8. Pathophysiology of restrictive cardiomyopathy. The rigid myocardium results in elevated
ventricular diastolic pressures and decreased ventricular flling. The resultant symptoms can be predicted from
these abnormalities. CO cardiac output.
264 (chapter 10

The restrictive cardiomyopathies share nearly identical symptoms, physical signs, and
hemodynamic prof les with constrictive pericarditis, as described in Chapter 14. However, it
is important to distinguish these two entities because constrictive pericarditis is often correct-
able, whereas interventions for the restrictive cardiomyopathies are more limited.

The most useful diagnostic tools to differentiate restrictive cardiomyopathy from con-
strictive pericarditis are transvenous endomyocardial biopsy, computed tomography (CT),
and MRI. For example, in restrictive cardiomyopathies, transvenous endomyocardial biopsy
may demonstrate the cause of the condition (e.g., the presence of amyloid fbrils in amy-
loidosis, or iron deposits in patients with hemochromatosis [a condition of iron overload]).
CT or MRI scans accurately identify the thickened pericardium present in most patients
with constrictive pericarditis, a fnding that is not present in states causing restrictive
cardiomyopathy.

Treatment
Restrictive cardiomyopathy typically has a very poor prognosis, except when treatment can
target an underlying cause. For example, phlebotomy and iron chelation therapy may be help-
ful in the early stages of hemochromatosis. Symptomatic therapy for all etiologies includes
salt restriction and cautious use of diuretics to improve symptoms of systemic and pulmonary
congestion. Unlike the dilated cardiomyopathies, vasodilators are not helpful because systolic
function is usually preserved. Maintenance of sinus rhythm (e.g., converting atrial f brilla-
tion if it occurs) is important to maximize diastolic fling and forward cardiac output. Some
restrictive cardiomyopathies are prone to intraventricular thrombus formation, thus warrant-
ing chronic oral anticoagulant therapy. In the case of primary (AL) amyloidosis, chemother-
apy followed by autologous bone marrow stem cell transplantation has proved effective in
selected patients with early cardiac involvement.

OTHER FORMS OF CARDIOVIYOPATHY
Not all forms of cardiac muscle disease ft into the traditional categories of cardiomyopathy
described in this chapter. Examples of exceptions include (1) left ventricular noncompaction
(LVNC), and (2) arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC).

Left Ventricular Noncompaction
LVNC is a rare condition with features that overlap with hypertrophic, restrictive and dilated
cardiomyopathies. It is manifest by a thickened myocardium with very prominent trabecu-
lae and deep recesses that extend from the LV cavity into the intertrabecular spaces. The
abnormal regions of myocardium typically contract poorly, often demonstrate characteristics
of impaired diastolic relaxation, and predispose to rhythm disturbances and thrombus for-
mation. Patients with this condition may present in childhood or adulthood with symptoms
of heart failure (due to systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction), ventricular arrhythmias, or
thromboembolism.

LVNC appears to result from arrested development of the myocardium during fetal
development, though the exact mechanism has not been fully elucidated. Up to 50% of
patients with this condition have affected family members, and autosomal dominant, auto-
somal recessive and X-linked patterns of inheritance have been found. Mutations in at
least nine genes encoding sarcomere proteins have been identif ed in patients with LVNC
(including mutations that have also been associated with hypertrophic and dilated cardio-
myopathies), resulting in either the isolated disorder or a syndrome with other forms of
congenital heart disease.
The Gardiomyopathies 265

The diagnosis is usually established by typical features on 2-dimensional and color
Doppler echocardiography or by cardiac MRI. The prognosis is variable, but is worse
among symptomatic patients compared to those found to have the disorder incidentally
by imaging studies. One series indicated that 60% of patients had died or required car-
diac transplantation within 6 years of diagnosis, but other studies have reported less
dire outcomes.

Management is aimed at treating the symptoms and complications of LVNC as there is
no corrective therapy for the underlying condition itself. Depending on the clinical mani-
festations, approaches may include standard treatment of heart failure (Chapter 9), ICD
implantation for management of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, chronic anticoagu-
lation for those with accompanying atrial f brillation or signif cant contractile dysfunction to
prevent thromboembolism, and cardiac transplantation for those with advanced, refractory
heart failure.

Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy

ARVC, also termed arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, is another genetic form of

cardiomyopathy. It is characterized by replacement of right ventricular (and occasionally left

ventricular) myocardium with adipose and f brous tissue, resulting in rhythm disturbances
and contractile dysfunction. Ventricular arrhythmias originating from the abnormal ventri-
cle are common and may result in palpitations, syncope, and even sudden cardiac death.

Symptoms often begin in the teen years, and ARVC is another cause of sudden death among

young athletes.

Both autosomal dominant and recessive inheritance forms of ARVC have been identi-
fed. The majority of mutations occur in genes that encode components of desmosomes, cell
membrane structures responsible for cell-to-cell adhesion, leading to fbrosis and aberrant
signaling with proliferation of adipose tissue in the myocardium. Transvenous endomyocar-
dial biopsy of the RV may demonstrate fatty or f brofatty replacement of the myocardium, but
has a high false negative rate for identifying the disorder. Thus, diagnostic criteria also rely
on family history, ECG abnormalities (see Chapter 12, Box 12-1), the presence of arrhyth-
mias emanating from the RV, morphologic abnormalities detected by imaging studies (espe-
cially cardiac MRI), and genetic testing for specif c mutations. Management of ARVC typically
includes ICD implantation because the disease is progressive and life-threatening ventricular
tachycardia is common.

SUMVIARY

° Cardiomyopathies are a group of heart muscle disorders that cause mechanical and/or
electrical dysfunction of the myocardium, and often result in inappropriate ventricular
hypertrophy or dilatation (Table 10-5); heart failure and cardiovascular death are common
end manifestations.

e DCM is characterized by progressive ventricular chamber enlargement with impaired systolic
contractile function, often leading to symptomatic heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias,
and/or embolic complications.

° HCM is characterized by an abnormally thickened ventricular wall with abnormal diastolic
relaxation but usually intact systolic function; dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction during
systole may be present, and the most common symptoms are dyspnea and exertional angina.

e Ventricular arrhythmias in HCM may lead to sudden cardiac death.

° Restrictive cardiomyopathies are uncommon and are characterized by an abnormally stiff-
ened myocardium (because of f brosis or an inf Itrative process) leading to impaired diastolic
relaxation, but systolic contractile function is typically normal or near normal; symptoms of
heart failure are typical.
266 Chapter 10
TABLE 10-5
Hypertrophic Restrictive
Dilated Gardiomyopathy Crdiomyopathy CQrdiomyopathy
Ventricular Dilated LVwith little Marked hypertrophy, often Fbrotic or infiltrated
morphology concentric hypertrophy asymmetric myocardium
C= C= C=
LA
LV
Ftiologies Cenetic, infectious, Cenetic Amyloidosis, hemochro-
alcoholic, peripartum matosis, scleroderma,
radiation therapy
Symptoms Fatigue, weakness, Dyspnea, angina, syncope Dyspnea, fatigue
dyspnea, orthopnea, PND
Physical exam Pulmonary rales, S;; if RV S,; if outf ow obstruction Predominantly signs of RV
failure present: JVD, present: systolic murmur failure: JVD, hepatomeg-
hepatomegaly, peripheral loudest at left sternal aly, peripheral edema
edema border, accompanied by
mitral regurgitation
Pathophysiology Impaired systolic Impaired diastolic “Stiff? LV with impaired
contraction relaxation; LV systolic diastolic relaxation but
function vigorous, often usually normal systolic
with dynamic obstruction function
Cardiac size on Enlarged Normal or enlarged Usually normal
chest radiograph
Echocardiogram Dilated, poorly contractile LVhypertrophy, often more — Usually normal systolic
LV pronounced at septum; contraction; “speckled”
systolic anterior move- appearance in infiltrative
ment of MV with mitral disorders
regurgitation
Geen eee eee ee ee ee
LY left ventricle; PND, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea; RV right ventricle; JVD, jugular venous distension; MV mitral valve.
Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Christopher T. Lee, MD; Marc N. Wein,
MD; Yi-Bin Chen, MD; David Grayzel, MD; and Kay Fang, MD.
Additional Reading
Arbustini E, Narula J, Tavazzi J, et al. The MOGE(S) classif ca- Gersh BJ, Maron BJ, Bonow RO, et al. 2011 ACCF/ AHA guideline
tion of cardiomyopathy for clinicians. J Am Coll Cardiol. for the diagnosis and treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
2014;64:304-318. thy: Executive summary. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:2703—2738.
Bhatia NL, Tajik AJ, Wilansky S, et al. Isolated noncompaction Guan J, Mishra S, Falk RH, et al. Current perspectives on
of the left ventricular myocardium in adults: A systematic cardiac amyloidosis. Am J Physiol Heart Cire Physiol.
overview. J Card Fail. 2011;17:771-778. 2012;302:H544—H552.
Elkayam U. Clinical characteristics of peripartum cardiomyopa- Maron BJ, Ommen SR, Semsarian C, et al. Hypertrophic cardio-
thy in the United States: Diagnosis, prognosis, and manage- myopathy: Present and future, with translation into contempo-
ment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:659-670. rary cardiovascular medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:83-99.
The Gardiomyopathies 267

Maron BJ, Towbin JA, Thiene G, et al. Contemporary and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation.

def nitions and classif cation of the cardiomyopathies: 2006; 113:1807-1816.

An American Heart Association scientif c statement Murray B. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardio-

from the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Heart Failure myopathy (ARVD/C): A review of molecular and clinical

and Transplantation Committee; Quality of Care and literature. J Genet Couns. 2012;21:494—-504.

Outcomes Research and Functional Genomics and Sturm AC. Genetic testing in the contemporary diagnosis of

Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Groups; cardiomyopathy. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2013;10:63-72.
- + bs
bo a Yq
2 Mes
e
Mechanisms of |. §
° ° » for
Cardiac Arrhythmias | | |
—_
Morgan J. Prust
William G. Stevenson
Gary R. Strichartz - )
Leonard S. Lilly 3am
Chapter Outline N ormal cardiac function relies on the flow of electric impulses
—===——— = through the heart in an exquisitely coordinated fashion.
Normal Imp ulse Formation Abnormalities of the electric rhythm are known as arrhythmias
Ionic Basis of Automaticity ;
Native and Latent Pacemakers (also termed dysrhythmias) and are among the most common
Overdrive Suppression clinical problems encountered. The presentations of arrhyth-
Hectrotonic Interactions mias range from common benign palpitations to severe symp-
Altered Impulse Formation toms of low cardiac output and death. Therefore, a thorough
Alterations in Sinus Node understanding of these disorders is important to the daily
Se practice of medicine. |
Eahoncodatavomasioinnot Abnormally slow heart rhythms are termed bradycardias
parent Pacoieere (or bradyarrhythmias). Fast rhythms are known as tachycar-
Abnormal Automaticity dias (or tachyarrhythmias). Tachycardias are further char-
Triggered Activity acterized as supraventricular when they involve the atrium
a cles. This chapter extends the description of basic cardiac
Physiologic Basis of Antiarrhythmic electrophysiology presented in Chapter 1 and explains the
Therapy mechanisms by which arrhythmias develop, followed by a
Bradyarrhythmias general approach to their management. Chapter 12 describes
Tachyarrhythmias specifc rhythm disorders, including how to recognize and
treat them.

Dsorders of heart rhythm result from alterations of
impulse formation, impulse conduction, or both. The chap-
ter frst addresses how abnormalities of impulse formation

268
