- : i
mi 4
;
The Hectrocardiogram
David B. Fischer a
Leonard S. Lilly f
4 ,
ow
Chapter Outline C ardiac contraction relies on the organized f ow of elec-
trical impulses through the heart. The electrocardiogram
NLL LIELISE (EG) is an easily obtained recording of that activity and pro-
e :
Hectrocardiographic Lead vides a wealth of information about cardiac structure and func-
Reference System tion. This chapter presents the electrical basis of the BGG in
Sequence of Normal Cardiac health and disease and leads the reader through the basics of
Activation interpretation. To practice using these principles and to become
TAVETPICUaUOn or the skillful at interpreting HCGtracings of your patients, you should
a an also consult one of the complete electrocardiographic manuals
ibration . ;
Hoov=Risohns listed at the end of this chapter.
Heart Rate
Intervals (P. ,
ee ELECIRICAL MEASUREVENF—SINGLE-
ee CELL MODEL
This section begins by observing the propagation of an
Complex electrical impulse along a single cardiac muscle cell, illus-
SF Segment and ‘Pwave trated in Figure 4-1. On the right side of the diagram, a
Abnormalities voltmeter records the electrical potential at the cell’s sur-
face on graph paper. In the resting state, the cell is polar-
ized; that is, the entire outside of the cell is electrically
positive with respect to the inside, because of the ionic
distribution across the cell membrane, as described in
Chapter 1. In this resting state, the voltmeter electrodes,
which are placed on opposite outside surfaces of the cell,
do not record any electrical activity, because there is no
electrical potential difference between them (the myocyte
74
The Hectrocardiogram 75
—__*__* Voltmeter
CAISDIING MIUISKCIUE Cla UL aan
A “eon msec ee |
— Depolarization Current
+ + + + +
™ .s
HGURE 4-1. Depolarization of a single cardiac B 4 BO RSH
muscle cell. A. In the resting state, the surface of -
the cell is positively charged relative to the inside. —_—
Because the surface is homogeneously charged,
the voltmeter electrodes outside the cell do not - er ne
record any electrical potential difference (“f at = = = EE
line” recording). B. Stimulation of the cell initiates a
depolarization (blue shaded area); the outside of — HEHEHE
the depolarized region becomes negatively charged Cc + TWISEISISSI
relative to the inside. Because the current of —__ =e
depolarization is directed toward the (+) electrode
of the voltmeter, an upward def ection is recorded. ea a _
C Depolarization spreads, creating a greater HRA
upward def ection by the recording electrode. A
D. The cell has become fully depolarized. The D oe eG iaaret
surface of the cell is now completely negatively -
charged compared with the inside. Because the
surface is again homogeneously charged, a f at FF
line is recorded by the voltmeter. E Notice that if pe EETETRERERETE
the position of the voltmeter electrodes had been @) © a
reversed, the electrical current would have been E Hie aie
directed away from the (+) electrode, causing the SO eee
def ection to be downward.
depolarized area (negatively charged surface) and the still-polarized (positively charged surface)
portions of the cell. As a result, an electrical current begins to f ow between these two regions.

By convention, the direction of an electrical current is said to f ow from areas that are nega-
tively charged to those that are positively charged. When a depolarization current is directed
toward the (+) electrode of the voltmeter, an upward defection is recorded. Conversely, if
it is directed away from the (+) electrode, a downward def ection is recorded. Because the
depolarization current in this example proceeds from left to right—that is, toward the (+)
electrode—an upward def ection is recorded by the voltmeter. As the wave of depolarization
propagates rightward along the cell, additional electrical forces directed toward the (+) elec-
trode record an even greater upward def ection (see Fig. 4-1C). Once the cell has become fully
depolarized (see Fig. 4-1D), its outside is completely negatively charged with respect to the
inside, the opposite of the initial resting condition. However, because the surface charge is
homogeneous once again, the external electrodes measure a potential difference of zero and
the voltmeter records a neutral “fat line” at this time.

Note that in Figure 4-1E, if the voltmeter electrode positions had been reversed, such that
the (+) pole was placed to the left of the cell, then as the wave of depolarization proceeds
toward the right, the current would be directed away from the (+) electrode and the recorded
def ection would be downward. This relationship should be kept in mind when the polarity
of ECG leads is described below.

Depolarization initiates myocyte contraction and is then followed by repolarization, the
process by which the cellular charges return to the resting state. In Figure 4-2, as the left side
76 Chapter 4
— Direction_of Current_
A mp OK He HGURE 4-2. Sequence of repolarization of a
—- = FF single cardiac muscle cell. A. As repolarization
<—— . . commences, the surface of the cell at that site
[_]Depolarized portion we .
[Repolatized portion becomes positively charged and a current is generated
from the still negatively charged surface areas to
the repolarized region (blue arrows). Because the
—T> - current is directed away from the (+) electrode of
a = ab ay the voltmeter, a downward deflection is recorded.
(+) Bessette: ~~ B, Repolarization progresses. C Repolarization has
completed, and the outside surface of the cell is
B .. Hees = Once again homogeneously charged, so that no
TO further electrical potential is detected (flat line once
again). D. Sequence of cardiac depolarization and
ok RR Rg repolarization as measured by an KG machine at the
sun Skin surface. As described in the text, repolarization
actually proceeds in the direction opposite to that
sHeNwAst Of depolarization in the intact heart, such that the
Cc Htiaiteit deflections of repolarization are inverted compared
to the schematics presented in parts A-C of this
f gure. Therefore, the def ections of depolarization and
Ere eee eae repolarization of the normal heart are oriented in the
same direction. Note that the wave of repolarization is
D SHEET seserseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeey depolarization.
of the cardiac muscle cell in our example begins to repolarize, its surface charge becomes
positive once again. An electrical potential is therefore generated, and current flows from the
still negatively charged surface toward the positively charged region. Since this current is
directed away from the voltmeter’s (+) electrode, a downward deflection is recorded, opposite
to that which was observed during the process of depolarization.

Repolarization is a slower process than depolarization, so the inscribed deflection of repo-
larization is usually wider and of lower magnitude. Once the cell has returned to the resting
state, the surface charges are once again homogeneous and no further electrical potential is
detected, resulting in a neutral flat line on the voltmeter recording (Fig. 4-2C).

The depolarization and repolarization of a single cardiac muscle cell have been considered
here. As a wave of depolarization spreads through the entire heart, each cell generates electri-
cal forces, and it is the sum of these forces, measured at the skin’s surface, that is recorded
by the ECG machine.

It is important to note that in the intact heart, the sequence by which regions repolarize
is actually opposite to that of their depolarization. This occurs because myocardial action
potential durations are more prolonged in cells near the inner endocardium (the frst cells
stimulated by Purkinje f bers) than in myocytes near the outer epicardium (the last cells to
depolarize). Thus, the cells close to the endocardium are the frst to depolarize but are the
last to repolarize. As a result, the direction of repolarization recorded by the ECG machine
is usually the inverse of what was presented in the single-cell example in Figure 4-2. That
is, unlike the single-cell model, the electrical deflections of depolarization and repolariza-
tion in the intact heart are usually oriented in the same direction on the ECG tracing (see
Fig. 4-2D).

The direction and magnitude of the deflections on an ECG recording depend on how the
generated electrical forces are aligned to a set of specif c reference axes, known as ECG leads,
as described in the next section.
The Hectrocardiogram 77
o ‘ KE =
Right arm Left arm CIES)
electrode N electrode y=)
Chest V —— SS)
electrodes ! eR =e, V
HIiGURE 4-3. Placement of ~]\- V; / Sf V 5
electrocardiogram (EGG) electrodes. Right leg Left leg ‘a yi, 4
A. Standard positions. B. Gose-up view of electrode electrode |
chest electrode placement, at the standard J \
positions listed in Table 4-1. A B
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC LEAD REFERENCE SYSTEM
When the frst device to produce an ECG was invented over a century ago, the recording was
made by dunking the patient’s arms and legs into large buckets of electrolyte solution that
were wired to the machine. That process was likely fairly messy and fortunately is no longer
necessary. Instead, wire electrodes are placed directly on the skin, held in place by adhesive
tabs, on each of the four limbs and on the chest in the standard arrangement as shown in
Figure 4-3. The right-leg electrode is not used for the measurement but serves as an electrical
ground. Table 4-1 lists the standard locations of the chest electrodes.

A complete ECG (termed a “12-lead ECG’) is produced by recording electrical activity
between the electrodes in specifc patterns. This results in six reference axes in the body’s
frontal plane (termed limb leads) plus six in the transverse plane (termed chest leads). Figure
4-4 demonstrates the orientation of the six limb leads, which are electronically constructed as
described in the following paragraphs.

The ECG machine records lead aVR by selecting the right-arm electrode as the (+) pole with
respect to the other electrodes. This is known as a unipolar lead, because though there is a (+)
pole, there is no single (—) pole; rather, the other limb electrodes are averaged to create a com-
posite (—) reference. When the instantaneous electrical activity of the heart points in the direc-
tion of the right arm, an upward deflection is recorded in lead aVR. Conversely, when electrical
forces are directed away from the right arm, the ECG inscribes a downward deflection in aVR.

Similarly, lead aVF is recorded by setting the left leg as the (+) pole, such that a positive
deflection is recorded when forces are directed toward the feet. Lead aVLis selected when the
left-arm electrode is made the (+) pole, and it records an upward deflection when electrical
activity is aimed in that direction.

In addition to these three unipolar leads, three bipolar limb leads are part of the standard
ECG recording (Fig. 4-4). Bipolar indicates that one limb electrode is the (+) pole and another
single electrode provides the (—) reference. In this case, the ECG machine inscribes an upward

Vv 4th IG, 2 cmto the right of the sternum

V; Ath IG, 2 cmto the left of the sternum

V; Mdway between V, and V,

Vv, 5th IG, left midclavicular line

V; Same level as V,, left anterior axillary line

Vo Same level as V,, left midaxillary line
ee
IG, intercostal space.
78 Chapter 4
Unipolar Limb Leads
G) 3 < (+)
LL |
“He “}\ 8) 4)
aVR a VF aVL
Bipolar Limb Leads
(-) SL (+) (-) (-)
( |
(+) (+)
I II Il
HiGURE 4-4. ‘The six limb leads are derived from the electrodes placed on the arms and left leg. Top,
each unipolar lead has a single (+) designated electrode; the (—) pole is an average of the other electrodes.
Bottom, each bipolar lead has specific (—) and (+) designated electrodes. Although these illustrations show
outstretched arms to depict the location of the electrodes, such positioning is not necessary when acquiring
a patient’s EGGrecording. Even in the natural position of the arms by the patient’s sides, directionality of the
leads is maintained.
def ection if electrical forces are heading toward the (+) electrode and records a downward
def ection if the forces are heading toward the (—) electrode. A simple mnemonic to remember
the orientation of the bipolar leads is that the lead name indicates the number of I’s in the
placement sites. For example, lead I connects the left arm to the right arm, lead II connects the
right arm to the left leg, and lead III connects the left arm to the left leg. Table 4-2 summarizes
how the six limb leads are derived.
TABLE 4-2
Lead (+) Hectrode (—) Hectrode
Bipolar leads
I lA RA
II IL RA
Ill IL lA
Unipolar leads
aVR RA a
aVL LA a
aVE LL a
a
‘Indicates the (—) electrode for this lead is constructed by combining the other limb electrodes.
IA, left arm; LL left leg; RA right arm.
The Hectrocardiogram 79
~90° By overlaying these six limb leads, an axial reference
~120° —60° system is established (Fig. 4-5). In the f gure, each lead
, is presented with its (+) pole designated by an arrow-
awe WL head and the (—) aspect by dashed lines. Note that
a .
a each 30-degree sector of the circle falls along the (+)
} or (—) pole of one of the standard six ECG limb leads.
Also note that the (+) pole of lead I points to 0 degrees
+180° 10° and that, by convention, measurement of the angles
proceeds clockwise from 0 degrees as +30 degrees, +
60 degrees, and so forth. The complete ECG record-
4150° 430° ing provides a simultaneous “snapshot” of the heart’s
electrical activity, taken from the perspective of each
of these lead reference axes.
il q Figure 4-6 demonstrates how the magnitude and
+120° aVF +60 mer ; _
490° direction of electrical activity are represented by the
ECG recording in each lead. This f gure should be
FIGURE 4-5. ‘The axial reference system is created studied until the following four points are clear:
by combining the six limb leads shown in Higure 4-4.
Each lead has a (+) region indicated by the arrowhead
and a (—) region indicated by the dashed line.
Lead I Lead I
C)-<-<---- (+) (-)- - - = - = =)
| [ [TTT TT Tt Ty) | | [TTT ITT TTT
- . eS Pe IERERERE
\ HERE FREER
i ' CCC K ' CCC
1) EEA HEE
| Rea || FRE NEE
"| RH TMA Gaa tian
MEE | TET
HERE PERE
; [TTT TTT Try ty [} [TTT TTT Ty ty
LTT TTT TTT tt) y LITT TTT TT TT)
ECG
A B
Lead I Lead I
CO) - i) (()- > = 55 > (4)
hr Hot |
HEHE 1 ' HEE
1 LTT TTT Tt tt ty 1 ! TTT TTT Try yt ty
EEE HY FEE
7 EEE ( 7 HEE
EEE be | pt
HEE ; HHA
FEES EEE, FEEWETE:
REECE HEE tee
LITT TTT Tt ty i [TT TTT Try ty
EEE FEE
Cc D
HGURE4-6. Relationship of the magnitude and direction of electrical activity to the KGGlead. This
example uses lead I, but the same principles apply to all leads. A. The electrical vector is oriented parallel to
lead I and is directed toward the (+) electrode; therefore, a tall upward def ection is recorded by the lead.
B. The vector is still oriented toward the (+) electrode of lead I but not parallel to the lead, so that only
a component of the force is recorded. Thus, the recorded def ection is still upward but of lower amplitude
compared with that shown in (A). C The electrical vector is perpendicular to lead I so that no def ection is
generated. D. The vector is directed toward the (—) region of lead I, causing the ECGto record a downward
def ection.
80 Chapter 4
; |
vs
ae) SS:
— RV hey, HGURE4-7. The chest (precordial) leads. A. The
x cross-sectional plane of the chest. B. Arrangement of
| Tt T V3 the six chest electrodes shown in the cross-sectional
A B Vv; Vp plane. Note that the right ventricle is anterior to the
left ventricle.
1. An electrical force directed toward the (+) pole ofa lead results in an upward deflection on
the ECG recording of that lead.
2. Forces that head away from the (+) electrode result in a downward deflection in that lead.
3. The magnitude of the deflection, either upward or downward, reflects how parallel the
electrical force is to the axis of the lead being examined. The more parallel the electrical
force is to the lead, the greater the magnitude of the deflection.
4. An electrical force directed perpendicular to an electrocardiographic lead does not register
any activity by that lead (a flat line on the recording).

The six standard limb leads examine the electrical forces in the frontal plane of the body.
However, because electrical activity travels in three dimensions, recordings from a perpen-
dicular plane are also essential (Fig. 4-7). This is accomplished by the use of the six elec-
trodes placed on the anterior and left lateral aspect of the chest (see Fig. 4-3B), creating the
chest (also termed “precordial”) leads. The orientation of these leads around the heart in the
cross-sectional plane is shown in Figure 4-7B. These are unipolar leads and, as with the uni-
polar limb leads, electrical forces directed toward these individual (+) electrodes result in an
upward deflection on the recording of that lead, and forces heading away record a downward
deflection.

A complete ECG records samples from each of the six limb leads and each of the six chest
leads in a standard order, examples of which are presented later in this chapter (see Figs. 4-28
to 4-36).

SKQUENCE OF NORMAL CARDIAC ACTT VATION

Conduction of electrical impulses through the heart is an orderly process. The normal beat
begins at the sinoatrial node, located at the junction of the right atrium and the superior
vena cava (Fig. 4-8). The wave of depolarization spreads rapidly through the right and left
atria and then reaches the atrioventricular (AV) node, where it encounters an expected delay.
The impulse then travels rapidly through the bundle of His and into the right and left bundle
branches. The latter divide into the Purkinje fbers, which radiate toward the myocardial
f bers, stimulating them to depolarize and contract.

Each heartbeat is represented on the ECG by three major deflections that record the
sequence of electrical propagation (see Fig. 4-8B). The P wave represents depolarization of
the atria. Following the P wave, the tracing returns to its baseline as a result of the conduc-
tion delay at the AV node. The second deflection of the ECG, the QRS complex, represents
depolarization of the ventricular muscle cells. After the QRS complex, the tracing returns
to baseline once again, and after a brief delay, repolarization of the ventricular cells is sig-
naled by the T wave. Occasionally, an additional small deflection follows the T wave (the U
wave), which is believed to represent late phases of ventricular repolarization.
The Hectrocardiogram 81
AV node
Bundle of His
SA node ,O Se
1 2~a
3
HGURE4-8. Cardiac conduction pathway.
A. The electrical impulse begins at the sinoatrial ; x
(SA) node (1) then traverses the atria (2). After Right .
. . bundle S 4
a delay at the AVnode (3), conduction continues branch \ Left bundle
through the bundle of His and into the right branch
and left bundle branches (4). The latter divide
into Purkinje f bers, which stimulate contraction A
of the myocardial cells. B. Corresponding
waveforms on the ECGrecording: (1) the SA node QRS
discharges (too small to generate any deflection
on EGG), (2) P wave inscribed by depolarization
of the atria, (3) delay at the AVnode, and P | | T
(4) depolarization of the ventricles (QRS
complex). The T wave represents ventricular ‘) ‘1 ,) ‘1
repolarization. B 12 3 4
The QRS complex may take one of several shapes but can always be subdivided into indi-
vidual components (Fig. 4-9). If the frst deflection of the QRS complex is downward, it is
known as a Q wave. However, if the initial deflection is upward, then that particular complex
does not have a Q wave. The R wave is def ned as the frst upward deflection, whether or not
a Q wave is present. Any downward deflection following the R wave is known as an S wave.
Figure 4-9 demonstrates several common variations of the QRS complex. In certain pathologic
states, such as bundle branch blocks, additional deflections may be inscribed, as shown in
the f gure. Please study Figure 4-9 until you can conf dently differentiate a Q from an S wave.
Figure 4-10 illustrates the course of normal ventricular depolarization as it is recorded in
the frontal plane by two of the ECG leads: aVF and aVL. The recording in aVF represents
electrical activity from the perspective of the inferior (i.e., underside) aspect of the heart,
R R A R
{, J, A hh
Ss Ss y Ss
as
A B Cc D E
HGURE4-9. Examples of QRS complexes. A. The frst deflection is downward (Q wave), followed by an
upward deflection (R wave), and then another downward wave (S wave). B Because the frst deflection is
upward, this complex does not have a Q wave; rather, the downward deflection after the R wave is an S wave.
C AQR&S complex without downward deflections lacks Qand S waves. D. QRS composed of only a downward
deflection; this is simply a Qwave but is often referred to as a QS complex. E Asecond upward deflection
(seen in bundle branch blocks) is referred to as R’.
82 chapter 4
y + aVL
Septum x + (+)
ah +
+
+@+ \ +VS\+
Na+ + + ake
&Y + cr Ty}
+ Way ¥ i
+ + + Y Left
: - ventricle
Right < A
ventricle +
T
aVF
A (+)
aVL aVL
\\) |
T T
J. aVF | avF
B Cc
} rv aVL _| ) xe aVL
T T
aVF aVF
D E
HGURE 4-10. Normal ventricular depolarization in the frontal plane as recorded by leads aVL and aVE
A. In the resting state, the surface is homogeneously charged so that the leads do not record any electrical
potential. B The frst area to depolarize is the left side of the ventricular septum. This results in forces
heading away from aVL (downward deflection on aVLrecording) but toward the (+) region of aVE such that
an upward deflection is recorded by that lead. G D. Depolarization continues; the forces from the thicker-
walled left ventricle outweigh those of the right, such that the electrical vector swings leftward and posteriorly
toward aVL (upward deflection) and away from aVE E At the completion of depolarization, the surface is again
homogeneously charged, and no further electrical forces are recorded.
The Hectrocardiogram 83
and aVL records from the perspective of the left lateral side. Recall that in the resting state,
the surfaces of myocardial cells are homogeneously charged such that no electrical activity is
detected by the external ECG leads and the machine records zero voltage.

The initial portion of ventricular myocardium that is stimulated to depolarize with each
cardiac cycle is the midportion of the interventricular septum, on the left side. Because depo-
larization reverses the cellular charge, the surface of that region becomes negative with respect
to the inside, and an electrical potential is generated (see Fig. 4-10B, arrow). The initial cur-
rent is directed toward the right ventricle and inferiorly. Because the force is directed away
from the (+) pole region of lead aVL, an initial downward deflection is recorded in that lead.
At the same time, the electrical force is directed toward the (+) pole region of lead aVF, caus-
ing an initial upward deflection to be recorded there. As the wave of depolarization spreads
through the ventricular myocardium, the progression of net electrical vectors is depicted by
the series of arrows in Figure 4-10.

As the lateral walls of the ventricles are depolarized, the electrical forces of the thicker left
side outweigh those of the right. Therefore, the arrow’s orientation is increasingly directed
toward the left ventricle (leftward and posteriorly). At the completion of depolarization, the
myocytes are again homogeneously charged, no further net electrical force is generated, and
the ECG voltage recording returns to baseline in both leads. Thus, in this example of depo-
larization in a normal heart, lead aVL inscribes an initial small Q wave followed by a tall R
wave. Conversely, in lead aVF, there is an initial upward deflection (R wave) followed by a
downward S wave.

The sequence of ventricular depolarization can similarly be examined in the transverse
(horizontal) plane of the body from the six chest (precordial) leads (Fig. 4-11). Once
again, recall that the frst region to depolarize is the midportion of the interventricular
septum on the left side. Depolarization proceeds from there toward the right ventricle
(which is anterior to the left ventricle), then toward the cardiac apex, and fnally around
the lateral walls of both ventricles. Because the initial forces are directed anteriorly—that
is, toward the (+) pole of V,—the initial deflection recorded by lead V, is upward. These
same initial forces are directed away from V, (which overlies the lateral wall of the left
ventricle), so an initial downward deflection is recorded there. As the wave of depolar-
ization spreads, the electrical forces of the left ventricle outweigh those of the right, and
the vector swings posteriorly toward the bulk of the left ventricular muscle. As the forces
swing away from lead V,, the deflection there becomes downward, whereas it becomes
more upright in lead V,;. Leads V, through V; record intermediate steps in this process,
such that the R wave becomes progressively taller from lead V, through lead V, (see Fig.
4-11E), a pattern known as “R-wave progression.” Typically, the height of the R wave
becomes greater than the depth of the S wave in lead V; or V4; the lead in which this
occurs is termed the “transition” lead.

INTERPRETATION OF THE ELECTROCARDIOGRAM

From a technical standpoint, the ECG is recorded on a special grid divided into lines
spaced | mm apart in both the horizontal and the vertical directions. Each ffth line is
made heavier to facilitate measurement. On the vertical axis, voltage is measured in mil-
livolts (mV), and in the standard case, each 1-mm line separation represents 0.1 mV. The
horizontal axis represents time. Because the standard recording speed is 25 mm/sec, each
1 mm division represents 0.04 seconds and each heavy line (5 mm) represents 0.2 seconds
(Fig. 4-12).

Many cardiac disorders alter the ECG recording in a diagnostically useful way, and
it is important to interpret each tracing in a standard fashion to avoid missing subtle
84 chapter 4
V6 V6
a4 ~ V
LV
RV
vie J v,é A
A B
V6 Vo
Re! ~)
v, 4 v,¢ 4c
Cc D
V6 | HIGURE 4-11. Sequence of
“ depolarization in the transverse
(horizontal) plane recorded by
LV yes the chest (precordial) leads. A-D.
Depolarization begins at the left side
of the septum. The electrical vector
RV be then progresses posteriorly toward
V4
the thick-walled left ventricle. Thus,
% V,, which is an anterior lead, records
é é V3 an initial upward def ection followed
Vi Vo by a downward wave, whereas V, a
posterior lead, inscribes the opposite.
E In the normal pattern of the QRS
E from V, to VY, the R wave becomes
progressively taller and the S wave less
deep.
abnormalities. Here is a commonly followed sequence of analysis, followed by a descrip-
tion of each:
1. Check voltage calibration
2. Heart rhythm
3. Heart rate
4. Intervals (PR, QRS, QT)
5. Mean QRS axis
6. Abnormalities of the P wave
7. Abnormalities of the QRS (hypertrophy, bundle branch block, infarction)
8. Abnormalities of the ST segment and T wave
The Hectrocardiogram 85
Paper Speed: 25 mm/sec —————>
Hfhe—pe ote —— or ——t
| [k~pR QT PT TT EE
Pre EE EE EE EE Ed eT
Prt | tT te EE EE a
SG ee ee ee
SHGGGH (eee See Sey
SEE ETHIE EEE eee ee I
BHR lee ee
SE ee eee iia
A LANL ALT
a OSS
PEt ee ee EE EE EE ET
PTT eT ute TT ET ET TE TE | Tf
QRS \ ;
5mm = 0.2 sec
(1 mm = 1 small box = 0.04 sec)
HGURE4-12. Enlarged view of an KGGstrip. A standard EGGis recorded at 25 mm/sec, so that each
1 mm on the horizontal axis represents 0.04 seconds. Each | mm on the vertical axis represents 0.1 mV
Measurements in this example are as follows: PR interval (from the beginning of the P wave to the beginning
of the QRS) = 4 small boxes = 0.16 seconds; QRS duration (from the beginning to the end of the QRS
complex) = 1.75 small boxes = 0.07 seconds; and QT interval (from the beginning of the QRS to the end of
the T wave) = 8 small boxes = 0.32 seconds. The corrected QT interval = or . Because the R-R interval = 15
0.32 yRER
small boxes (0.6 seconds), the corrected QT interval = ——= =0.41 seconds .
( ) V0.6
Qlibration
ECG machines routinely inscribe a 1.0-mV vertical signal at the beginning or end of each
12-lead tracing to document the voltage calibration of the machine. In the normal case, each
1-mm vertical box on the ECG paper represents 0.1 mV, so that the calibration signal records
a 10-mm deflection (e.g., as shown later in Fig. 4-28). However, in patients with markedly
increased voltage of the QRS complex (e.g., some patients with left ventricular hypertrophy or
bundle branch blocks), the very large deflections do not ft on the standard tracing. To facili-
tate interpretation in such a case, the recording is often purposely made at half the standard
voltage (i.e., each 1-mm box = 0.2 mV), and this is indicated on the ECG tracing by a change
in the height of the 1.0-mV calibration signal (at half the standard voltage, the signal would be
5 mm tall). It is important to check the height of the calibration signal on each ECG to ensure
that the voltage criteria used to def ne specif c abnormalities are applicable.
Heart Rhythm
The normal cardiac rhythm, initiated by depolarization of the sinus node, is known as sinus
rhythm. An ECG tracing shows sinus rhythm if the following criteria are met: (1) each P wave
is followed by a QRS; (2) each QRS is preceded by a P wave; (3) the P wave is upright in leads
I, II, and II; and (4) the PR interval is greater than 0.12 seconds (three small boxes).

If the heart rate in sinus rhythm is between 60 and 100 bpm, then normal sinus rhythm
is present. If less than 60 bpm, the rhythm is sinus bradycardia; if greater than 100 bpm, the
rhythm is sinus tachycardia. Other abnormal rhythms (termed arrhythmias or dysrhythmias)
are described in Chapters 11 and 12.
86 Chapter 4
Heart Rate
The standard ECG recording paper speed is 25 mm/sec. Therefore,
; 25 mm/sec x 60 sec/ min
Heart rate (beats per minute) = —HWHA
Number of mm between beats
or more simply, as shown in Figure 4-13:
Heart rate = eh
a'© ~ Number of small boxes between
two consecutive beats

It is rarely necessary, however, to determine the exact heart rate, and a more rapid determi-
nation can be made with just a bit of memorization. Simply “count off’ the number of large
boxes between two consecutive QRS complexes, using the sequence

300 — 150 — 100 —75— 60 —50
which corresponds to the heart rate in beats per minute, as illustrated in Figure 4-13 (method 2).

When the rhythm is irregular, these estimates cannot be easily applied, so the heart rate
in such a case may be better approximated by counting the number of complexes during
6 seconds of the recording and multiplying that number by 10. ECG paper usually has time
markers, spaced 3 seconds apart, printed at the top or bottom of the tracing that facilitates
this measurement (see Fig. 4-13, method 3).

Intervals (PR, QRS, QD

The PR interval, QRS interval, and QT interval are measured as demonstrated in Figure 4-12.
For each of these, it is appropriate to take the measurement in the lead in which the interval
is the longest in duration (the intervals can vary a bit in each lead). The PR interval is mea-
sured from the onset of the P wave to the onset of the QRS. The QRS interval is measured
from the beginning to the end of the QRS complex. The QT interval is measured from the
beginning of the QRS to the end of the T wave. The normal ranges of the intervals are listed
in Table 4-3, along with conditions associated with abnormal values.

Because the QT interval varies with heart rate (the faster the heart rate, the shorter the
QT), the corrected QT interval is determined by dividing the measured QT by the square root
of the RR interval (see Fig. 4-12). When the heart rate is in the normal range (60 to 100 bpm),
a rapid rule can be applied: if the QT interval is visually less than half the interval between
two consecutive QRS complexes, then the QT interval is within the normal range.

Mean QRS Axis

The mean QRS axis represents the average of the instantaneous electrical forces generated
during the sequence of ventricular depolarization as measured in the frontal plane. The nor-
mal value is between —30 degrees and +90 degrees (Fig. 4-14). A mean axis that is more nega-
tive than — 30 degrees implies left axis deviation, whereas an axis greater than +90 degrees
represents right axis deviation. The mean axis can be determined precisely by plotting the
QRS complexes of different leads on the axial reference diagram for the limb leads (see Fig.
4-5), but this is tedious and is rarely necessary. The following rapid approach to axis determi-
nation generally provides suff cient accuracy.

First, recall from Figure 4-5 that each ECG lead has a (+) region and a (-—) region.
Electrical activity directed toward the (+) half results in an upward deflection, whereas
activity toward the (—) half results in a downward deflection on the ECG recording of that
The Hectrocardiogram 87
Method 1 First, count the number of small boxes (1 mm each) between two adjacent
QRS complexes (1e., between 2 “beats”). Then, since the standard paper
speed is 25 mm/sec:
Heart Rate _ (25 mm/sec X 60 sec/min) _ 1,500
(beats/min) Number ofmm between beats number ofmm between beats
In this example, there are 23 mm between the first 2 beats.
23 mm between beats
Gest omeds ottecnenere A Se Tae pssevasthcsesitosastinn:
Bea eee ne ere Ue te gt Ut met ces
Sere ee eee regener ee eS
Therefore, the heart rate = wee = 65 bpm
Method 1 is particularly helpful for measuring fast heart rates (> 100 bpm)
Method 2 The “count-off’ method requires memorizing the sequence:
300—150—100—75—60—S50
Then use this sequence to count the number of large boxes between two
consecutive beats:
300 100 60
Start 150 | 75 | 50
here 1 | |
Re ra a Paes aD red need hoes eaucd ronald Cues Rae OT cota Uoeemee a ote a poses Sota! Uosea ueant Coes Cuezes feee teat Deate
Seeds areca eeet ec atest eat ga aes estan ee tee est tee ore eestemeeeceeteee
RBDEGGaEsaebaa! fEGnsiuaasedoresececc! is tssnslscelcaseereeet! |aescunntnecersccssees! tueced esaeesecet lessen tatuscactene
aad Huue <a? bi Sou _ Gh, cuavansion”_.0# gi Bee ca cama bSe8 2 ver 6] Hot Zan. asenbae’_, er G1 omc (GB oa neatsfa 0 i Roc ceaL cee
SEE a eee EEE ne A ae areca ee eee a ae eee
The second QRS falls between 75 and 60 bpm; there fore, the
heart rate is approximately midway between them ~67 bpm. Knowing
that the heart rate is approximately 60—70 bpm is certainly close enough.
Method 3 ECG recording paper often indicates 3-sec time markers at the top or
bottom of the tracing:
marker marker
\<—_—————-. 3 sec ————————>
SUgSH FTEEE EEEET SERED SEETDETSOEECDET ENDET GEER" CoETSODUU ov ee ERDT roeny CuszssGdzssgues cused fuceiCESlcegesegeae saat
Gea eee te ee rt eee GREE
To calculate the heart rate, count the number of QRS complexes between
the 3-sec markers (= 6 beats in this example) and multiply by 20. Thus,
the heart rate here is approximately 120 bpm.
It’s even easier (and more accurate) to count the number of complexes
between the first and third markers on the strip (representing 6 sec
of the recording) and then multiply by 10 to determine the heart rate.
Method 3 is particularly helpful for measuring irregular heart rates.
FIGURE 4-13. Methods to calculate heart rate.
88 Chapter 4
TABLE 4-3
Interval Normal Decreased Interval Increased Interval
PR 0.12—0.20 sec ° Preexcitation syndrome ~»° First-degree AVblock
(3-5 small boxes) * Junctional rhythm
QRS <0.10 sec * Bundle branch blocks
(<2.5 small boxes) * Ventricular ectopic beat
° Toxic drug effect (e.g., certain
antiarrhythmic drugs—see
chapter 17)
ES I
or Corrected QF <0.44 sec —» Hypercalcemia » Hypocalcemia
* Tachycardia * Hypokalemia (7 QU interval
owing to t U wave)
* Hypomagnesemia
* Myocardial ischemia
* @ngenital prolongation of QT
° Toxic drug effect
eee
T
“Corrected QT = QT .
VR-R
lead. To determine whether the axis is normal or abnormal, examine the QRS complexes
in limb leads I and II. As illustrated in Figure 4-15, if the QRS is primarily positive in both
of these leads (i.e., the upward def ection is greater than the downward def ection in each
of them), then the mean vector falls within the normal range and no further calculation is
necessary. However, if the QRS in either lead I or II is not primarily upward, then the axis is
abnormal, and the approximate axis should then be determined by the more precise method
L
ef axe
%
~90° “6,
—120° —60°
Left axis deviation
—150° 309° | ° Inferior wall myocardial infarction
aVR aVL ¢ Left anterior fascicular block
¢ Left ventricular hypertrophy
| (sometimes)
+180° 10°
A Right axis deviation
¢ Right ventricular hypertrophy
+150° +30° * Acute right heart strain
(e.g., massive pulmonary embolism)
¢ Left posterior fascicular block
tit I
“en +120 aVF +60
ay. +90
LS: d, -
“Via tion
HiGURE4-14. A normal mean QRS axis falls within the shaded area (between —30 degrees and +90
degrees). Amean axis more negative than —30 degrees is termed left axis deviation, whereas an axis more
positive than +90 degrees is right axis deviation. The f gure shows common conditions that result in axis
deviation.
The Hectrocardiogram 89
If the QRS complex is mainly upward (positive) Similarly, ifthe QRS is predominantly upward in
in limb lead J, then the mean axis falls within the limb lead I, then the mean axis falls within the
“+” region of that lead, shown as the blue half of “+” half oflead IL shown as the red halfhere.
the circle below.
—90
\
\
‘\ (+)
| +150
|
I
+90 +60
If the QRS is predominantly upright in both
leads I and II, then the mean axis must fall
within their common “+” regions: between —30
and +90.
—30
Normal
Axis
+90
HGURE 4-15. The mean axis is within the normal range if the QRS complex is predominantly upright in
limb leads I and II.
described in the following paragraphs. Please be aware that some ECG teaching resources
recommend examining leads I and aVF, rather than leads I and II, to determine whether the
mean axis falls in the normal range. However, using leads I and aVF for this purpose would
erroneously classify a mean axis between 0 degrees and —30 degrees as being abnormal, as
aVF would record a primarily downward deflection in that case. Examining leads I and II
instead avoids that error.

In order to determine the mean axis with greater precision when necessary, frst consider
the special example demonstrated in Figure 4-16. The sequence of a ventricular depolar-
ization is represented in this f gure by vectors a through e, along with the corresponding
deflections on the ECG recording of lead I. The initial deflection (representing left septal
depolarization) points to the patient’s right side. Because it is directed completely away from
the (+) pole of lead I, a strong downward deflection is recorded by the lead. As depolarization
continues, the arrow swings downward and to the left, resulting in less negative deflections
in lead I. After arrow c, the electrical vector swings into the positive region of lead I, so that
upward deflections are recorded.
90 chapter 4
J | In this special example, in which electrical forces
° begin exactly opposite lead I’s (+) electrode and termi-
Leaat | nate when pointed directly at that electrode, note that
(-) = “ F (+) ak. the mean electrical vector points straight downward
Lv Ke | Vb (in the direction of arrow c), perpendicular to the lead
I axis. Also note the conf guration of the inscribed QRS
| | complex in lead I. There is a downward deflection,
followed by an upward deflection of equal magnitude
Mean | (when the upward and downward deflections of a
axis QRS are of equal magnitude, it is termed an isoelec-
T tric complex). Thus, when an ECG limb lead inscribes
(+) A an isoelectric QRS complex, it indicates that the mean
Lead aVF electrical axis of the ventricles is perpendicular to that
particular lead.
FIGURE 4-16. Sequence of ventricular Therefore, an easy way to determine the mean QRS
depolarization when the mean axis is +90 degrees. axis ig to glance at the six limb lead recordings and
Because the mean axis is perpendicular to limb lead . . . .
1, an isoelectric ORS complex (height of upward observe which one has the most isoelectric-appearing
def ection = height of downward def ection) is complex: the mean axis is simply perpendicular to it.
recorded by that lead (see text for details). One step remains. When the mean axis is perpendicular
to a lead, it could be perpendicular in either a clockwise
or a counterclockwise direction. In the example of Figure 4-16, the isoelectric complex appears
in lead I, such that the mean vector could be at +90 degrees or it could be at —90 degrees,
because both are perpendicular. To determine which of these is correct requires inspecting the
recording of the ECG lead that is perpendicular to the one inscribing the isoelectric complex
(and is therefore parallel to the mean axis). If the QRS is predominantly upright in that perpen-
dicular lead, then the mean vector points toward the (+) pole of that lead. If it is predominantly
negative, then it points away from the lead’s (+) pole. In the example, the isoelectric complex
appears in lead I; therefore, the next step is to inspect the perpendicular lead, which is aVF (see
Fig. 4-5 if this relationship is not clear). Because the QRS complex in aVF is primarily upward,
the mean axis points toward its (+) pole, which is in fact located at +90 degrees.

To summarize, the mean QRS axis is calculated as follows:

1. Inspect limb leads I and II. If the QRS is primarily upward in both, then the axis is normal
and you are done. If not, then proceed to the next step.

2. Inspect the six limb leads and determine which one contains the QRS that is most isoelec-
tric. The mean axis is perpendicular to that lead.

3. Inspect the lead that is perpendicular to the lead containing the isoelectric complex. If the

QRS in that perpendicular lead is primarily upward, then the mean axis points to the (+)

pole of that lead. If primarily negative, then the mean QRS points to the (—) pole of that lead.

Conditions that result in left or right axis deviation are listed in Figure 4-14. In addition, the
vertical position of the heart in many normal children and adolescents may result in a mean
axis that is slightly rightward (greater than +90 degrees).

In some patients, isoelectric complexes are inscribed in all the limb leads. That situation
arises when the heart is tilted, so that the mean QRS points straight forward or back from the
frontal plane, as it may be in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease; in such a case,
the mean axis is said to be indeterminate.

Abnormalities of the P Wave
The P wave represents depolarization of the right atrium followed quickly by the depolar-
ization of the left atrium; the two components are nearly superimposed on one another
(Fig. 4-17). The P wave is usually best visualized in lead II, the lead that is most parallel to
The Hectrocardiogram 91
RAww-! Senne ee ie
Normal LAccee! tene- wee peewee
Combined —_f\_ —@mM
FIGURE 4-17. The P wave represents
superimposition of right atrial (RA)
i izati RA RA
and left atrial (LA) depolarization, RA enlargement NP _ULA \
RA depolarization occurs slightly earlier (P height > 2.5 mm / \ a
than LA depolarization, because of the in lead Il) \
proximity of the RA to the sinoatrial LA
node. In RA enlargement, the initial
component of the P wave is prominent LA enlargement RAY UIA RA
(>2.5 mm tall) in lead Il. In LA (Negative P in V, a \
enlargement, there is a large terminal > 1 mm wide and XK
downward def ection in lead V, (> 1 mm > 1mm deep) LA
wide and >1 mm deep).
the flow of electrical current through the atria from the sinoatrial to the AV node. When the
right atrium is enlarged, the initial component of the P wave is larger than normal (the P is
taller than 2.5 mm in lead II).

Left atrial enlargement is best observed in lead V;. Normally, V, inscribes a P wave with an
initial positive deflection reflecting right atrial depolarization (directed anteriorly), followed
by a negative deflection, owing to the left atrial forces oriented posteriorly (see Fig. 1-2 for
anatomic relationships). Left atrial enlargement is therefore manifested by a greater-than-
normal negative deflection (at least | mm wide and 1 mm deep) in lead V, (see Fig. 4-17).

Abnormalities of the QRS G@mplex

Ventricular Hypertrophy
Hypertrophy of the left or right ventricle causes the affected chamber to generate greater-
than-normal electrical activity. Ordinarily, the thicker-walled left ventricle produces forces
that are more prominent than those of the right. However, in right ventricular hypertrophy
(RVH), the augmented right-sided forces may outweigh those of the left. Therefore, chest
leads V, and V>, which overlie the right ventricle, record greater-than-normal upward deflec-
tions: the R wave becomes taller than the S wave in those leads, the opposite of the normal
situation (Fig. 4-18). In addition, the increased right ventricular mass shifts the mean axis of
the heart, resulting in right axis deviation (mean axis greater than +90 degrees).

In left ventricular hypertrophy, greater-than-normal forces are generated by that cham-
ber, which simply exaggerates the normal situation. Leads that directly overlie the left ventri-
cle (chest leads V; and V, and limb leads I and aVL) show taller-than-normal R waves. Leads
on the other side of the heart (V, and V,) demonstrate the opposite: deeper-than-normal S
waves. Many different criteria are used for the diagnosis of left ventricular hypertrophy by
ECG. Three of the most helpful criteria are listed in Figure 4-18.

Bundle Branch Blocks
Interruption of conduction through the right or left bundle branches may develop from
ischemic or degenerative damage. As a result, the affected ventricle does not depolarize
in the normal sequence. Rather than rapid uniform stimulation by the Purkinje f bers, the
cells of that ventricle must rely on relatively slow myocyte-to-myocyte spread of electrical
92 chapter 4
V6
~ Y
RIGHT VENTRICULAR HYPERTROPHY
~ *R>S in lead V,
1 ¢ Right axis deviation
4 2
I 3
vi
A
V6
va
3 LEFT VENTRICULAR HYPERTROPHY
¢S in V, plus
R in Vs or V6 = 35 mm or
*RinaVL> 11 mm or
1 *RinleadI>15 mm
2
V1
B

FIGURE4-18. Ventricular hypertrophy. The arrows indicate the sequence of average electrical forces during
ventricular depolarization. A. Right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy. The RV forces outweigh those of the left,
resulting in tall R waves in leads V, and V, and a deep S wave in lead VY, (compare to normal QRS complexes
in Rg. 4-11E). B Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy exaggerates the normal pattern of depolarization, with
greater-than-normal forces directed toward the LV resulting in a tall R wave in Y and a deep S wave in lead V..
activity traveling from the unaffected ventricle. This delayed process prolongs depolariza-
tion and widens the QRS complex. A normal QRS duration is less than or equal to 0.10
seconds (<2.5 small boxes). When a bundle branch block widens the QRS duration to 0.10
to 0.12 seconds (2.5 to 3.0 small boxes), an incomplete bundle branch block is present. If
the QRS duration is greater than 0.12 seconds (3.0 small boxes), complete bundle branch
block is identif ed.

In right bundle branch block (RBBB) (Fig. 4-19; see also Fig. 4-29), normal depolariza-
tion of the right ventricle is interrupted. In this case, initial depolarization of the ventricular
septum (which is stimulated by a branch of the left bundle) is unaffected so that the normal
small R wave in lead V, and small Q wave in lead V, are recorded. As the wave of depolariza-
tion spreads down the septum and into the left ventricular free wall, the sequence of depo-
larization is indistinguishable from normal, because left ventricular forces normally outweigh
those of the right. However, by the time the left ventricle has almost fully depolarized, slow
cell-to-cell spread has f nally reached the “blocked” right ventricle and depolarization of that
chamber begins, unopposed by left ventricular activity (because that chamber has nearly fully
depolarized). This prolonged depolarization process widens the QRS complex and produces a
late depolarization current in the direction of the anteriorly situated right ventricle. Since the
terminal portion of the QRS complex in RBBB represents these right ventricular forces acting
The Hectrocardiogram 93
Right Left
Bundle Branch Block Bundle Branch Block
A B
Ve Ve |
~ <
1 LV
RV
Vv; Ty vi t al
V6 Vo of
sg _| £
2
ve a ve —,
Vo Vo nM
£ yg
3
¢ Widened QRS ¢ Widened QRS
* RSR' in V, (rabbit ears) * Broad, notched R in V¢
* Prominent S in V¢ ¢ Absent R and prominent S
in V,
HGURE4-19. Bundle branch blocks. Schematic view of the ventricles in the horizontal plane showing
that interruption of conduction through the right or left bundles results in delayed, slowed activation of the
respective ventricle and widening of the QRS complex. The blue color shows progressive depolarization of the
ventricles, and the red arrows show the sequence of electrical vectors that result. A. In right bundle branch
block, normal initial activation of the septum (1) is followed by depolarization of the left ventricle (2). Slow
cell-to-cell spread activates the right ventricle (RV) after the left ventricle (LV) has nearly fully depolarized (3),
so that the late forces generated by the RVare unopposed. Therefore, V, records an abnormal terminal upward
deflection (R’), and VY records an abnormal, terminal deep S wave, as shown in panel 3. B In left bundle
branch block, the initial septal depolarization is blocked, such that the frst forces are oriented from right to
left. Thus, the normal initial R wave in V, and Qwave in VY are absent (1). After the RVdepolarizes (2), late,
slow activation of the LVresults in a terminal upward deflection in VY and downward deflection in V, (3).
94 chapter 4
alone, the ECG records an abnormal terminal upward deflection (known as an R’ wave) over
the right ventricle in lead V, and a downward deflection (S wave) in V, on the opposite side
of the heart. The appearance of the QRS complex in lead V, in RBBB (upward R, downward S,
then upward R’) is often described as having the appearance of “rabbit ears.”

Left bundle branch block (LBBB) produces even more prominent QRS abnormalities. In
this situation, normal initial depolarization of the left septum does not occur; rather, the right
side of the ventricular septum is frst to depolarize, through branches of the right bundle.
Thus, the initial forces of depolarization are directed toward the left ventricle instead of the
right (see Fig. 4-19B; see also Fig. 4-30). Therefore, an initial downward deflection is recorded
in V,, and the normal small Q wave in V, is absent. Only after depolarization of the right
ventricle does slow cell-to-cell spread reach the left ventricular myocytes. These slowly con-
ducted forces inscribe a widened QRS complex with abnormal terminally upward deflections
in the leads overlying the left ventricle (e.g., V; and V.), as shown in Figure 4-19B.

Fascicular Blocks
Recall from Chapter | that the left bundle branch subdivides into two main divisions, termed
fascicles: the left anterior fascicle and the left posterior fascicle. Although LBBB implies that
conduction is blocked in the entire left bundle branch, impairment can also occur in just one
of the two fascicles, resulting in left anterior or left posterior fascicular blocks (also termed
hemiblocks). The main signif cance of fascicular blocks in ECG interpretation is that they can
markedly alter the mean QRS axis.

Anatomically, the anterior fascicle of the left bundle runs along the front of the left ven-
tricle toward the anterior papillary muscle (which is located in the anterior and superior por-
tion of the chamber), whereas the posterior fascicle travels to the posterior papillary muscle
(which is located in the posterior, inferior, and medial aspect of the left ventricle). Under
normal conditions, conduction via the left anterior and left posterior fascicles proceeds simul-
taneously, such that electrical activation of the left ventricle is uniform, spreading outward
from the bases of the two papillary muscles. However, if conduction is blocked in one of the
two divisions, then initial LV depolarization arises exclusively from the unaffected fascicle
(Fig. 4-20).

In the case of left anterior fascicular block (LAFB), left ventricular activation begins via
the left posterior fascicle alone, at the posterior papillary muscle, and then spreads to the rest
of the ventricle. Because the left posterior fascicle frst activates the posterior, inferior, medial
region of the left ventricle, the initial impulses are directed downward (i.e., toward the feet)
and toward the patient’s right side (see Fig. 4-20). This results in a positive deflection (initial
small R wave) in the inferior leads (leads II, III, and aVF) and a negative deflection (small Q
wave) in the left lateral leads, Iand aVL. As depolarization then spreads upward and to the
left, toward the “blocked” anterior, superior, and lateral regions of the left ventricle, a posi-
tive deflection (R wave) is inscribed in leads I and aVL, while a negative deflection (S wave)
develops in the inferior leads. The predominance of these leftward forces, resulting from the
abnormal activation of the anterior superior left ventricular wall, results in left axis deviation
(generally more negative than —45 degrees). A complete 12-lead ECG demonstrating the pat-
tern of LAFB is shown later (see Fig. 4-34).

Left posterior fascicular block (LPFB) is less common than LAFB. In LPFB, ventricular
activation begins via the left anterior fascicle alone at the base of the anterior papillary muscle
(see Fig. 4-20). As that anterosuperior left ventricular region depolarizes, the initial forces are
directed upward and to the patient’s left (creating a positive R wave in leads [and aVL and a
negative Q wave in the inferior leads). As the impulse then spreads downward and to the right
toward the initially blocked region, an S wave is inscribed in leads Iand aVL, while an R wave
is recorded in leads II, III, and aVF. Because the bulk of these delayed forces head toward the
patient’s right side, right axis deviation of the QRS mean axis occurs (see Fig. 4-36).
Left Anterior Fas cicular Block Left Posterior Fascicular Block
mm \ —/
1
—/
ry |
aVF aVF
v aVL e aVL
2
Tt a ry _|
aVF aVF
ye AVL | aVL
3
ry ry
aVF aVF
¢ Left axis deviation ¢ Right axis deviation
¢ Small Q in leads aVLand I ¢ SmallR in leads aVLand I
¢ Small R in inferior leads (II, III, a VF) ¢ Small Q in inferior leads (II, Ill, a VF)
HGURE 4-20. Left anterior and left posterior fascicular blocks and their pattems in the KGGlimb leads. The
schematic at the top of the f gure shows the left ventricle (LV) in the frontal plane. The mitral valve (MV) chordae
tendineae insert into the anterior (A) and posterior (P) papillary muscles, which are important landmarks: the anterior
fascicle of the left bundle branch courses toward the anterior papillary muscle, whereas the posterior fascicle travels to
the posterior papillary muscle (the fascicles are not shown). Notice that the anterior papillary muscle is superior to the
posterior papillary muscle. Left side of the f gure: In left anterior fascicular block, activation begins solely in the region
of the posterior papillary muscle (1) because initial conduction to the anterior papillary muscle is blocked (denoted
by the X). As a result, the initial forces of depolarization are directed downward toward the feet, producing an initial
positive deflection (R wave) in lead aVF and a negative deflection (Q wave) in lead aVL As the wave of depolarization
spreads toward the left side and superiorly, aVF begins to register a negative deflection and aVLstarts to record a positive
deflection (2). Panel 3 shows the complete QRS complexes at the end of depolarization. Right side of the f gure: In left
posterior fascicular block (denoted by the X), LVactivation begins solely in the region of the anterior papillary muscle (1).
Thus, the initial forces are directed upward and toward the patient’s left side, producing an initial R wave in aVLand
a Qwave in aVE Panels 2 and 3 show how the spread of depolarization travels in the direction opposite that of LAFB.
96 Chapter 4
In contrast to RBBBs and LBBBs, LAFB and LPFB do not result in Pte fe fied [pend
signif cant widening of the QRS because rapidly conducting Purkinje =
f bers bridge the territories served by the anterior and posterior fas-
cicles. Therefore, although the sequence of conduction is altered, eH
the total time required for depolarization is usually only slightly pro- A ~~ Normal Q Waves
longed. Also note that although LBBBs and RBBBs are most easily
recognized by analyzing the patterns of depolarization in the precor- oo
dial (chest) leads, in the case of LAFB and LPFB, it is the recordings =}
in the limb leads (as in Fig. 4-20) that are most helpful.
Pathologic Q waves in Myocardial Infarction B Pathologic Q Waves
As you will learn in Chapter 7, sudden complete occlusion of a #qWQ@JRE4-21. Normal
coronary artery typically results in a syndrome known as acute _ versus pathologic Q waves.
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). When this @mopared with the small
occurs, a sequence of abnormalities of the ST segment and Twave Qwaves generated during
evolves over a period of hours, as described in the next section, 2ommal depolarization (A,
Unless reperfusion of the occluded artery is quickly achieved, irre- blue arrow), pathologic Q
. . waves are more prominent
versible necrosis of the heart muscle served by that vessel ensues with a width > 1 mm (1 small
and is marked by the formation of pathologic Q waves as part of ox) or depth greater than
the electrocardiographic QRS complex. 25% of the height of the QRS
Recall that it is normal for small initial Q waves to appear in complex (B, green arrow).
some of the ECG leads. For example, initial septal depolarization
routinely inscribes small Q waves in leads V, and aVL. Such physiologic Q waves are of
short duration (<0.04 seconds or | small box) and of low magnitude (less than 25% of the
QRS total height). In distinction, pathologic Q waves are more prominent (Fig. 4-21; also see
Fig. 4-29), typically having a width greater than or equal to 1 small box in duration or a depth
greater than 25% of the total height of the QRS. The ECG lead groupings in which pathologic
Q waves appear reflect the anatomic site of the infarction (Table 4-4; also see Fig. 4-23).
Pathologic Q waves develop in the leads overlying infarcted tissue because necrotic muscle
does not generate electrical forces (Fig. 4-22). This results in an imbalance whereby electrical
forces generated by other regions of healthy myocardium become abnormally unopposed.
Thus, the ECG electrode over the infarcted region detects electrical currents from the healthy
tissue on opposite regions of the ventricle, which are directed away from the infarct and
the recording electrode, thus inscribing the downward deflection. Q waves are permanent
evidence of an ST-elevation type of myocardial infarction; only rarely do they disappear over
time.

Notice in Table 4-4 that in the case of a posterior wall myocardial infarction (see Fig. 4-23 A),
it is not pathologic Q waves that are evident on the ECG. Because standard electrodes are
Anatomic Site Leads with Abnormal EGG @mplexes* Qronary Artery Mbst Often Responsible

Inferior II, Hl, aV, RCA

Anteroseptal V,-V; LAD

Anteroapical V,-V, LAD (distal)

Anterolateral V.-V,, I, aV. COX

Posterior V,-V;, (tall R wave, not Q wave) RCA
Cee
*Pathologic Q waves in all of leads V.—V implies an “extensive anterior M’” usually associated with a proximal left
coronary artery occlusion.
FX left circumf ex coronary artery; LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; RCA, right coronary artery.
The Hectrocardiogram 97
not typically placed on the patient’s back overly-
ing the posterior wall, other leads must be relied aVL
on to indirectly identify the presence of such Lv
an infarction. Chest leads V, and V>, which are
directly opposite the posterior wall, record the RV — \
1
inverse of what leads placed on the back would
demonstrate. Therefore, taller-than-normal R
waves in leads V, and V; are the equivalent of
pathologic Q waves in the diagnosis of a poste-
rior wall MI. It may be recalled that RVH also
produces tall R waves in leads V, and V;. These
conditions can be distinguished, however, as
RVH causes right axis deviation, which is not a AVL
feature of posterior wall MI. "
It is important to note that ifa Q wave appears
in only a single ECG lead, it is not diagnostic of ) ma
an infarction. True pathologic Q waves should
appear in the groupings listed in Table 4-4 and
Figure 4-23. For example, if a pathologic Q wave
is present in lead III but not in II or aVE it likely
does not indicate an infarction. Also, Q waves
are disregarded in lead aVR because electrical
forces are normally directed away from the right
arm. Finally, in the presence of LBBB, Q waves
are usually not helpful in the diagnosis of MI aVL
because of the markedly abnormal pattern of ¥
depolarization in that condition. 5 —\
SFSegment and Wave Abnormalities
Transient Myocardial Ischemia
Among the most important abnormalities of the
ST segments and T waves are those related to
coronary artery disease. Because ventricular
repolarization is very sensitive to myocardial e
perfusion, reversible deviations of the ST seg-
ments and T waves (usually depression of the 4 _|
ST segment and/or inversion of the T wave) are /
common during transient episodes of myocar-
er . . . . Pathologic
dial ischemia, as will be explained in Chapter 6. Q wave
Acute SF-Segment Hevation Mi FIGURE 4-22. Sequence of depolarization
. . . . . recorded by lead aVL, overlying a lateral wall
As described in the previous section, pathologic  j araretion (dark shaded region). A pathologic
Q waves are associated with one major type of Qwave is recorded because the necrotic muscle
myocardial infarction (STEMI) but do not differ- does not generate electrical forces; rather, at the
entiate between an acute event and an MI that _ time when the lateral wall should be depolarizing
occurred weeks or years earlier. However, an (panel 3), the activation of the healthy muscle
acute STEMI results in a temporal sequence of ° the opposite side of the heart is unopposed,
we . . such that net forces are directed away from
ST and T-wave abnormalities that permits this ;
eee . Lo. i, aVL. The terminal R wave recorded by aVL
distinction (Fig. 4-24). The initial abnormality is or cuts depolarization of the remaining viable
elevation of the ST segment, often with a peaked — jnyocardium beyond the infarct.
98 Chapter 4
Anteroseptal Ante rola tera
(V,-V>) (V5—Ve,1, aVL)
Anteroseptal Posterior
(V,-V>) (Tall R in
4 V,-Vo)
\ / Ne Inferior
; Anteroapical UI, Ill, a VF)
(V3—V4) | /
A
Anteroseptal Anteroapical
I aVR V4 I aVR Vi
UIA Jay 4, I apr | 0-0
I aVL Vs I aVL V2 Vs
AQ | WAL AWW IE | IAL | ayy | JIL
i aVF V3 V6 ml aVF V6
sir | | At | I tr | Lit
Anterolateral Inferior
aVR V1 V4 I aVR Vi V4
Il V2 aVL V2 Vs
AQ AAA OEE | yy | IE
li aVF V3 V3 Vo

B
FIGURE 4-23. Relationship between KGGleads and cardiac anatomic regions. A. The lead groupings listed
in parentheses represent each region. B. Mniaturized 12-lead ECGGschematic drawings showing the standard
orientation of printed samples from each lead. The major anatomic groupings are colored and labeled in each
drawing. While the presence of pathologic Q waves in leads V, and V, are indicative of anteroseptal infarction,
be aware that tall initial R waves in those leads can indicate a posterior wall infarction (not shown in part B),
as described in the text.
appearance of the T wave. At this early stage, myocardial cells are still viable and Q waves
have not yet developed. In patients who achieve successful acute coronary reperfusion (by
f brinolytic therapy or percutaneous coronary intervention, as described in Chapter 7), the
ST segments return to baseline and the sequence of changes described in the next paragraph
do not occur.

In patients who do not achieve successful acute reperfusion, within several hours myo-
cyte death leads to loss of the amplitude of the R wave and pathologic Q waves begin to be
inscribed by the ECG leads positioned over the infarction territory. During the frst 1 to 2 days
following infarction, the ST segments remain elevated, the T wave inverts, and the Q wave
deepens (see Fig. 4-24). Several days later, the ST-segment elevation returns to baseline, but
the T waves remain inverted. Weeks or months following the infarct, the ST segment and
T waves have usually returned to normal, but the pathologic Q waves persist, a permanent
The Hectrocardiogram 99
Normal Acute Hours Day 1-2 Days Weeks
later later
¢ ST elevation ¢ STelevation ¢ T wave inversion * STnormalizes ¢ ST &T normal
« JR Wave * Qwave deeper ° T wave inverted * Q wave persists
* Q wave begins
FIGURE 4-24. ECGevolution during acute SFelevation myocardial infarction. However, as described
in Chapter 7, if successful early reperfusion of the coronary occlusion is achieved, the initially elevated ST
segment returmms to baseline without subsequent T-wave inversion or Q wave development.
marker of the MI. If the ST segment remains elevated several weeks later, it is likely that a
bulging f brotic scar (ventricular aneurysm) has developed at the site of infarction.

These evolutionary changes of the QRS, ST, and T waves are recorded by the leads over-
lying the zone of infarction (see Table 4-4 and Fig. 4-23). Typically, reciprocal changes are
observed in leads opposite that site. For example, in acute anteroseptal MI, ST-segment eleva-
tion is expected in chest leads V, and V>; simultaneously, however, reciprocal changes (ST
depression) may be inscribed by the leads overlying the opposite (inferior) region, namely
in leads II, Il], and aVF. An example of reciprocal ST changes is shown later in Figure 4-32.

The mechanism by which ST-segment deviations develop during acute MI has not been
established with certainty. It is believed, however, that the abnormality results from injured
myocardial cells immediately adjacent to the infarct zone producing abnormal diastolic or
systolic currents. One explanation, the diastolic current theory, contends that these dam-
aged cells are capable of depolarization but are abnormally “leaky,” allowing ionic flow that
prevents the cells from fully repolarizing (Fig. 4-25). Because the surface of such partially
depolarized cells in the resting state would be relatively negatively charged compared with
normal fully repolarized zones, an electrical current is generated between the two regions.
This current is directed away from the more negatively charged ischemic area, causing the
baseline of the ECG leads overlying that region to shift downward. Because the ECG machine
records only relative position, rather than absolute voltages, the downward deviation of the
baseline is not apparent. Following ventricular depolarization (indicated by the QRS com-
plex), after all the myocardial cells have fully depolarized (including those of the injured
zone), the net electrical potential surrounding the heart is true zero. However, compared
with the abnormally displaced downward baseline, the ST segment appears elevated (see
Fig. 4-25). As the myocytes then repolarize, the injured cells return to the abnormal state
of diastolic ion leak, and the ECG again inscribes the abnormally depressed baseline. Thus,
ST elevation in acute STEMI may in part reflect an abnormal shift of the recording baseline.

The systolic current theory of ST segment shifts contends that in addition to altering the
resting membrane potential, ischemic injury shortens the action potential duration of affected
cells. As a result, the ischemic cells repolarize faster than neighboring normal myocytes. Since
the positive surface charge of the damaged myocytes is restored earlier than that of the nor-
mal cells, a voltage gradient develops between the two zones, creating an electrical current
directed toward the ischemic area. This gradient occurs during the ST interval of the ECG,
resulting in ST elevation in the leads overlying the ischemic region (Fig. 4-26).

Acute Non—SFSegment Hevation Mi
As described in Chapter 7, not all acute myocardial infarctions result in ST-segment elevation
and potential Q-wave development. A more limited type of infarction, known as acute non—
ST-elevation MI, typically results from an acute partially occlusive coronary thrombus. In such
100 chapter 4
ST-segment Elevation MI
\) MK depolarized
) Recording
Injured segment is electrode Baseline shifted downward
partially depolarized
prior to stimulation
Non-STs egment Elevation MI
Baseline
shifted
upward
\ Heart fully depolarized
Injured segment is Recording \
partially depolarized electrode Normal baseline
prior to stimulation
HGURE 4-25. ST deviations in acute MI: diastolic injury current. Top, ionic leak results in partial
depolarization of injured myocardium in diastole, prior to electrical stimulation, which produces forces heading
away from that site and shifts the ECGbaseline downward. This is not noticeable on the EGG because only
relative, not absolute, voltages are recorded. Following stimulation, when the entire myocardium has fully
depolarized, the voltage is true zero but gives the appearance of ST elevation compared with the abnormally
depressed baseline. Bottom, in non—SF-segment elevation M, the process is similar, but the ionic leak
typically arises from the subendocardial tissue. As a result, the partial depolarization before stimulation results
in electrical forces directed toward the recording electrode; hence, the baseline is shifted upward. When
fully depolarized, the voltage is true zero, but the ST segment appears depressed compared with the shifted
baseline.
ve Ischemic A / elevation
~90 mV Normal a =<
Ischemic cells A
repolarize more Recording
A rapidly than normal B electrode
HGURE 4-26. ST deviation in acute SFsegment elevation MI: systolic injury current. A. Gompared with
normal myocytes (solid line), ischemic myocytes (dashed line) display a reduced resting membrane potential
and repolarize more rapidly. B. More rapid repolarization causes the surface of the ischemic zone to be
relatively positively charged at the time the ST segment is inscribed. The associated electrical current (arrows)
is directed toward the recording electrode overlying that site, so that the ST segment is abnormally elevated.
The Hectrocardiogram 101
Normal a | IN
Lo, ¢ ST “scooped” depression
Digoxin therapy _oe ¢ Mild PR prolongation
Hyperkalemia A | J \ * Tall ‘peaked”T wave
Severe \ ¢ Flattened P
hyperkalemia ¢ Widened QRS
; TU ¢ ST depression, flattened T
Hypokalemia ¢ Prominent U wave
Hypercalcemia ~ Ln ¢ Shortened QT interval
HIGURE 4-27. Qnditions that alter
repolarization of myocytes and therefore result ;
in SF-segment and T-wave abnormalities. Hypocalcemia * Prolonged QT interval
infarctions, it is ST-segment depression and/or T-wave inversion, rather than ST elevation,
that appears in the leads overlying the infarcting myocardium.

The extent of myocardial damage with this form of infarction is less than in STEMI, often
involving only the subendocardial layers of the myocardium. As a result, pathologic Q waves
do not develop, because the remaining viable cells are able to generate some electrical activity.

In non—ST-elevation MI, the diastolic current theory maintains that diastolic ionic leak of
injured cells adjacent to the subendocardial infarct zone generates electrical forces directed
from the inner endocardium to the outer epicardium and therefore toward the overlying ECG
electrode. Thus, the baseline of the ECG is shifted upward (see Fig. 4-25, bottom). Following
full cardiac depolarization, the electrical potential of the heart returns to true zero but, rela-
tive to the abnormal baseline, gives the appearance of ST-segment depression.

In addition to myocardial ischemia and infarction, there are several other causes of
ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities that result from alterations in myocyte repolarization.
The most commonly encountered of these are illustrated in Figure 4-27.

° The electrocardiogram (ECG) depicts the sequence of electrical impulses through the heart.
« Acomplete ECG (12-lead ECG) is produced by recording electrical activity between the
electrodes in specif c patterns, which results in six reference axes in the body’s frontal plane

(limb leads) plus six in the transverse plane (chest leads).

° Each heartbeat is represented on the ECG by three major deflections that record the
sequence of electrical propagation: (1) the P wave represents depolarization of the atria,
102 chapter 4
(2) the QRS complex records depolarization of the ventricular muscle cells, and (3) the
T wave indicates repolarization of the ventricular cells.

e Many cardiac disorders alter the ECG recording in a diagnostically useful way, and it is
important to interpret each tracing in a consistent fashion to avoid missing subtle abnor-
malities: (1) check voltage calibration, (2) heart rhythm, (3) heart rate, (4) intervals (PR,
QRS, QT), (5) mean QRS axis, (6) abnormalities of the P wave, (7) abnormalities of the
QRS (hypertrophy, bundle branch block, pathologic Q waves), and (8) abnormalities of
the ST segment and T wave (Table 4-5).

e Examples of normal and abnormal ECGs are presented in Figures 4-28 to 4-36; to practice
interpreting clinical tracings in greater depth, the reader should refer to any of the complete
ECG texts listed under “Additional Reading.”

e Disturbances of the cardiac rhythm are identif ed by electrocardiography and are described
in Chapters 11 and 12.

|. Glibration
* Check 1.0-mV vertical box inscription (normal standard = 10 mm)
2. Rhythm
* Sinus rhythm is present if
* Each P wave is followed by a QRS complex
° Fach QRS is preceded by a P wave
° P wave is upright in leads I, I, and HI
* PRinterval is >0.12 sec (3 small boxes)
° If these criteria are not met, determine type of arrhythmia (see Chapter 12)
3. Heart rate
* Ue one of three methods:
* 1,500/ (number of mm between beats)
* @unt-off method: 300—150—100—75—60—50
* Number of beats in 6 sec x 10
* Normal rate = 60-100 bpm (bradycardia <60, tachycardia > 100)
4. Intervals
* Normal PR= 0.12—0.20 sec (3—5 small boxes)
* Normal QRS < 0.10 sec (<2.5 small boxes)
* Normal QT < half the RR interval, if heart rate is normal
5. Mean QRS axis
* Normal if QRS is primarily upright in leads I and H (+90 degrees to —30 degrees)
* Otherwise, determine axis by isoelectric/ perpendicular method
6. P-wave abnormalities
* Inspect P in leads II and V, for left and right atrial enlargement
7. QRS wave abnormalities
* Inspect for left and right ventricular hypertrophy
* Inspect for bundle branch blocks
° Inspect for pathologic Q waves: What anatomic distribution?
8. SFsegment or T-wave abnormalities
* Inspect for ST elevations:
* SEsegment elevation MI
* Pericarditis (see Chapter 14)
* Inspect for ST depressions or T-wave inversions:
* Myocardial ischemia or non—SFelevation M
* Typically accompany ventricular hypertrophy or bundle branch blocks
* Metabolic or chemical abnormalities (see Hg. 4-27)
9. @mpare with patient’s previous KCG
I
Sun} osed LOSES Fan ‘+ Cogs bares igess Sheed ee] songs pursa (hess Feta Feeet tts
— — #+(+$§-« ee he . leeee eee
OP Pe ren ren — Se bOSe8 OF E Re Pewee ee, PERE FOR Oe FPP Oe Flees oe -.,  Heeee Oe
SRELIZETG Pikes te Se beads cada CEES ae) beaks cakes bodes C2SE2 Peas Ueass eld
POR e PTE RSET PH NET PETES PETE PST ET FETT (OTR PE TEENS RS PET PETES OES Te ee es Pee
Pettdtatedeciabekstsstideettdtsssiacetbettabiaetaedaeiettatesshiessedse
beds bodes based by loa bodes becad Loess bb23; ehand Seas ea bns based pbs) | beaes bts
EGS OOFGd bESES FL Cos FOSS bo aee HEESS Foes! bSdKs bEEHs Fesed bObes FES! | beuee bes
SOSS Podaa Reels 2 ite beste blsss based ides) sell cebds PSESS CEESs heel 1 issis bie
TSPPETTOTISTTITINGITEL EE ELET LITLE TE et
Cees Soeae baaes bs Coa benes baaes beaks cee OOO4 HORE OHO Fee ee FOO ¥ Reese tS
Leds 6o204 RRSES bd bos babSs bORes Leehs DOSS, COS0S ChEES CORES EESSS RES) b beEes 48
C084 C4045 Phos bt 18s bOOs Cekes eens bees] C8Oe) CERES Fetes FESS HSS) 4 beces bee
bobs comes hoses by (as beues Peues hOGGS Seas) 0064 bones bamas posee tOa) Shenae Fee
BEES Cosas CEERT ASE reees beaae POLST PHO” . CEwET BESET TESSE PETES FEY 4 Teese bee
PRES CEESE FEET ROSE ESSSEEEEAEHESSE EK? <b FSESS HERS ESSSS PEERS AY 3 FBS ES ESS
Less Soeed Pas.” Kees poses beans Hepes PA “Xe pooed penes coeed Pesos f. <e4 by ees bas:
BRON ESESSOSSSE MEE beede cdeed MSEEs eee peed epeas cogs bdaed tee Ss esaee pds
SOs SSS55 eSSSS ba UES CSS SE SSS RSSSS Cosa, SSSSa ES ESS POSE SS Ss ok, S SeeSs iss
Sues eaves Peers pp [an crags Seems NqeSs eves: peees anne seees bears Fes, | seers Te
Fabs castathens te es pease beaut haces teeey [esd sepee eeseateuea bees peeess pas
Sees thbed LbSSe bo —< Sones bass keees rend <8F4 FSObs FOOSE PEROT beet \eeeee pee
— ee ee ~z tenes bee
a a  —  )
peers eer Tverd F APT Peers tree? ea Fee?’ Peers Pewee eeens Peers 1874 Peers ree
reretbestlereetmeeleetederbiiicestersmcrtetereetecerlebrebereeteredse:
Sane C5245 POSES P \bo4 OESSS FRESS FERES F404 \5SEEs SERS ORRES PES ES BES (5 FSaes FS
ERAS Oe Ped Reeee by HOS FESS EGER FOS EE NEES, SHORT ERNES PONEE RAGES COT) BERESS DEE
Seen Seees EN See F Hee Pewee Penes HeEes Nene Peers SEeee betes Pease res yheees fee
PHAN ORSOEFEHOE Hh ESE HEREE FEREE HERES FLERE FHEHE FEREE COREE PERO Eee SF Heeee Fee
HESS CSFST FECES E. OFS FOSS FFSSS NESE FESS C5585 FEESS ESTES FESS FES, 4 bee es FS e
SESS ERSSS ER SEST Ros teags ceeagNSSSEESSS) Penss sages seen tages cesl atesss res
SETS SSSST FESS i OSS SESS SSS Sess SPSS) CSSSs SSSSS SSSes SSSSs Sok SSSSS ESS
BOs PESTS POSES b) See POSes HESes Hee SE RPSe SESET FEEES FERES Paaes bes) ¥ Sbees see
Bids Peeas cans 5 bea beees S555 beess rise pened Feds booed based bs! A cease be
ada eben SEES snes beeee be wed hones E> J bends tees Oe bee Rha he ed 1s beens poe
Pean eased bea. a 2dees beees beaad hawes A] v5d Saeed OeRRS bases bhaee fae hoses bao
ORE PSSSS PST TESTE CSRS SESE USES LOSS POSES CERES heeSs hades dS WSSES ade
Sees C5555 ESSES A PEE ESSE ESSSS BEETS LSSD, OUEST SEES ESSSS PEESS ESD, EEEES ESD
PePPTeerPs ere Pe Peed reredreripterth revi mrtietettrpeserperregecst enaee bee
ees 65504 bass be los bodes boas besee bes] [ba64 bend bases pasbs Foes fp bades bas
REQSETESS Cotes ba As Cwese reese teees beees leurs cregs estes cases teei hpeges tee
DEUS PSESS Cosas lS ESS ESS SESS Cisse SESE ESTs bodes bocce csS! (ilies ise
heres ———— ~~ Exees PeRES EETeT | _——~E Peers tee
StISSESEeebeR eas tet sds tlapisestiessbettehsatidiestieste beta dteteaees
Seah esbas bese l baa bese boans baees seep teased sober beeas beses bay poses bee
re rerrerereeterarreisessrsrrestrerrerctrerseres sr rerrerserrrr rer trots rte
beds pesadhesesh vas pesss hous b0eSs 0008 bases theds cases hhees hil ‘s beses baa
Lewes terns haees Bi Ree Peers Sees POPES PEER PETES EE TTS Peres haere hee) = Peers bee
Ses Cosss FESEs LE bes FESes bgees fesse cose CFE TeEHOes OR Ode PR eee Nes ee eee bee
Shdsibted baaes h boa beaks benad bases caee peanl bebessabatbiaes sae Vbwese bas
CROOEESS4 FECES eG FETE ESSE CE RSFHEESEEEES ESEKEESEES ES4ES PEERS FES FERS EE ES
poees eeaes CARES © Soe LOSS POaSs CSSSS SASS FEOUE DORES FSSRS TASES ESS EbESes ee
Semen REbOS OSG M1 COT HUNSS PENT POSES PSSM POSE ShORT PEETE PRES bee! f Hees Fee
OObe OR44 EROS F) P44 FOE 4k RE ROE FOE EE EES) FOEN4 CERES OEE 4 BESES bee) bh bee ee Bae
Keke cebesresrth! tas pedesteewthacss bese! Petes Cawns batenehana nee! Ubeane hee
04 be0SS POSES” Ven Ses bened HERE FORH C8 ) 18088 FSREs PETES ED> BPR.) hee
$oes cosas bbe?” -énes\ Ess peaes DOSS EY «6 bad | janes soees meses a Sabo") bow
Wwee veeed Per, eeere, Vee Peees reeset ri V5 Per S. Vere veres Press SET ren jhee
PRESS CS OSS FESR. VaR 696 PSERS POSSE PEO. are ROSS EOSSS FESSS ED. EER 4 Oe
See Cents POS. CGnee DOEEE SEES. ed Denes benee Dewees. “Sees eee
HOS eebtt beats B46 T+ Fees Reees Fetes ETA | Memes boO4+ bebe t beans LEG f Eeeee Fee
Sade tessa haees Sen bases FSaas hSESS Ved (Saeed Sees Reeed Sates feel Tessas pee
ones Petes Peeps | "es crees teens frees PETS —“aee Feene Tepes Loses CET! --—=00 Bes
et eb eo twee ft) lee | dc Bee de eae
THER EPR CT Pe ee\ BSSs SESE $3a88 19533 tase \hebabetisehioaete oe 9 FSo3 335
000 GOWOd PeeAS | DRGs FREER POREd bOOs RESEe beers bOnES COOba Poa Ee Ter? sheet tte
poees satan heeesh won (Sees beaas SSEES FOES! EESES CSaES seeeEs haees Low Aseses Eee
reeeterrtiasietieredssrrivertitisriers eereetrietioeretertster atest ete es
FS2e PSPS EESSS | F504 FORSSEERSS TEESE FOES FSEFASRNES PE RES PASSES FBG) |s Peees Ete
EWES OPES PESeS | bees beeee beeas Ferse rece Feees trees renee Pears ree ¥tenes bee
SESS ISLSIESSSS | eoSi cesses cewes bscaieees bases senes tosses hoses ces (ssasse eee
Sens bewes FeTet! Nees Feeet Feney frees ere reees Seeee Peres rears Tse in ceees tan
Peas ceeea beaed! Pete beaee baaed baeee ceaa ‘beens eeeas teased Pesos daa \apeees tee
SEIS TST PeSss Hees fesse fe ess FePes Fees | pease cents cesses Peses Fey, s fesss fee
REGS CERSGMSESS ROSS LESS PSSSS REESE ESSS | SSEES SEUSS ESSRSPESES ESS Uteeee PES
eas CSSSS RESES C555 C0556 FOSS USES SSd Coes RESSs Coeee EESes bee 4 co5es £32
RTs PEERS HETES | Thee PEST Paes PeEne Kae 4 Peaed PEnEs Peres Panes ir ss cress pes
S505 potas beees > Dee beees beaag heeed a> <9 based beGaS betea baaes .cSe4 pease bee
ehh ttt tis CoH LB HET ERI DSI Bae teh ein is ESSERE
POON CREE RAH £O48 LOOSE FE ROd OOH EE RED (1 FER ES COREA EHR Ee Pee ee Fe. 'Oheeee Pee
Sek cease hoses S525 toes booed boss baal \ boas bobee bodes booed doe Wheeee bas
Sees pSSEaESSey ESTs 6SSsy PSESs PSESS KOT | POSES SESSS ES SEn PETES pee) PESETS ESE
Shbstehaa COED G4G8 PROCS DAdas Deeeh bead | Seees EhOAS OOkaS Chane heel }aeg es bee
Obs bebe SED —~s ©5966 060686 60068 Cee ~~) 6086 66404 CEERS PESO —~—
Sete erred peear Sa —_ oT tT
seee S2Ss ese. wane sand PESS2 SSES2 FW esd LEEKS PSSSS wow 5 SSS ISS
eOEs CV SeT Sees | Hes Loews RESETS Peres Seen Pears Frees erTes heres reo. teers fre
weeeerene OSes? CAs Lease boaes beess beak SSOeE SEES LEESS boobs rok (2 boeee bas
POEMS ETEE. CHEE FOOSE EEE E FETE HOSE CPOE ECR ET COREE TEE Ed bd ew eee Ree
PORSCHES) BEE EROS FEES EEHAE EASY FOEEAEHEEE EE PEE HEEES HES 2h O44 BOE
Saas pated bases | bass bebes basen cesses head beaes Geass Abed bOeeS bea 4 hekes bad
SREe Pernt PEEES| SESE PEGS? Rens FSET ESES CEEET CERET SeERs PenET tem as rees nee
HOGS Coed PETES | POOa bESES SO eESs ReeSt HOee Peers bO008 Feed baSea ae (A beees Fae
HOSS FSSEE Fo G Od) POSE PSTEE FEARS NESEE HOSE HEEL FEROS SERA DEE HL EGE bees Bee
PRES ERESEFERES BES4EEEFEEEEASHSEEE FREE £8554 EHESS EEFE4 POSES FEE SE OSEE EES
LESS Sesad Shoes| Gass beses baaas sabes bans beans banSs CSESS baaeS bee bbaeee BSS
wer Peat et rs eee eee ere ree era ery rr ee reer
SEES CSEEA FREES) CHEE FSEEE COAST HEREE FEAT | PRREREEREE REPRE ERROR EE JEP OEES FOS
FUGs Oe bes beeeet ree beeee Pens hese by :8 bees ceeds Reena Fans «44 benee bas
Suds esbad beeee ) Gad pedes bones iOS 80s <on eens Seeds beeen pEaes “dae beees bos
SESS Cl Saa CeSes ASSa CeaSs RESSs SESS AS. Us SESS SSEES FSSES CASES ba Nd CSSSS BSS
CORT PUREE TS OOs SORE THE TS MOREE TT EeT aly | PO eeT SerTT TeTSE NST TSS Creeee tte
SOC eeeeabeses POSS FSSSS FSENS FOSSS FESS | SSESS FSOSS 89908 54088 SDS) | FSSS8 8S8
SELGEEESELESES S2ES ERSTE EDIEG EEETE Pete | LtSee ES ETe LOTT CESEa Th ees ite
OORT Abeae PARRA, “Hd CREEL Ream A PEELE HORE —<Ebs PORHs ROeedPAGORUPEA -—eak Eee
Sees estas sesas 2 Sa crasakesssl” Ji fsesseesa- oo
bamee CSET PSPC. Erre Penes Seers ieees re~. Feres sens feres free) fenes fee
beds e839 Fests Mss gst Bess fits GSTS ee SES HGG etd i
Sess cstes poses y igs babes Seaas poses hase peaed Sebas codea beaba res co heses tte
Sees cobad betes | sade pease paaes bhees haas beaed peed coned Roses bee (sheees pee
SESS SSSSI KSEE | LESITSSSUESSSIESESE SSS CISSE SESS SSSas tsSo5 LES. SSS iss
cere Seegs Peees | Pers beers Power Peret Pree Pree: rrere teces Peres Pee 4 fees pee
etepesreTesteiserriser tiers sespese as ereireisererrrisrieror eri ierer ee!
ESUISTITI PSSST Crea veaseeessy peessites PSSsrsoeys capes pases hes in reres ote
beads ceed ceees| Paes peeee Pleas neeesbnee beens Seees ceeed poses bod \tbeees beg
Se ctliSfliil) sss llsiitssirlssi ss GENT slse sss elle l ies fb eters est
TEES errs TRees| Veet PAaey cerns CPret hees Perea teres eerey Pee ee ee npr ens see
iitbessthitaibtsswetihrtpisstieSerepiiitesistitietiep cepyee ae
bobs Cobea PESOS GOES XESS bees NebSE EARS Sea 5 Janes tebea babes eA> 4 bx <s bee
nae behea bhewe \ KAS > 100 Phaed DORE ER? Od bare Jehee bbees keene’ <tebe> i kee
oboe 6a504 bees LAL oibs baeee boas > -f> ac bbbas bode DOSS <2 Sk ed ee
ORGS PEP es RESET | t9e Cwees PTE TS PERSE SET. | PEE Ss SERS DeEes Penes EP. TE Seers Bee
Sade beteapesed Sues tease beans be5a} sted | Guang cowes babes pages bed \tpeaee Bt
onde ceeed bOSS4 Bone b555s boa ee be048 bOsd | OS04s CObESs beseS peees Fes) b pases bas
ean GkSad beeed SOee Leese beacuse Ceres KSEE | Sensi eenes Raeae heaee cee! 5 leees bee
chek eeessbeses Sess enehs bases hanes sed? | beats bees besss bases see! (bosses cee
ERs 522z5 Ne ees “yaa Baas eeear od weeps CEEEs EE SEE reees - jens nas
CEES CREA RSOR” — .. ee TES EERE AEESA ewe. PEEKS CHENG OO RAR FESO. ~Reeees Oe
TITETIIOII SIS SINTICINIILIOTI SIs ee ett iT ieti srr iris Pie
Seen bene Fase) S24 beees boned bObes Pees | Reese bones Gees heals tin su heees bee
SES SSSS4 bESSS y L8bS boSSs ESSS4 bSSSE SDA | babES SoESS SESES ROSES PA, KA bSSes bos
Stesbteseltritiksrelistsitertitietteseaberiitiiiiieeeritttiteeititereite
EEE SESS ESTES GET] PERES ESTES CEES SEES | EEE Es ESEET Seesa EGSET hoe |] ERE: EE
Leah ease bases HELE ben ee teaes beeee seek |beeed bebeheeeee bese lay |Vheaee ren
SOEE AREA EREEE BOSE FOOSE OEEO4 BERS ESSE | FORE4EEEEE FEEO4LHOEO EEE Ob OOES BOO
Sods cosas canes | baos babes poses bonhs bead | beens Saees FoSea teaEe oO) Hi bases bse
See peeEs Pesos Seen pooes Penes Pees Sees | ceere Sees Press PEeee Pen 1 Peees Fee
seen eeeeaeeaee Seeedretedteeptessp ote dbercebessibecetdeceebrentpretegees
CORUOREREbOREE POG bess Phawh hebes tung |Feund Reade eeeed bases dad [a beeee bee
POSS CESS POSES | (RSE POSSE EE ERE NOOSE ERE FRANSES SOS EEC OS PEERS BO’ /4 FOS EE RED
Sass caoed poses ts Ge pases Sosa bSSes SES? (cosas Sones SeSes bees Osan beees Boe
Peer veges reves no ep rece: Fever heres rest vreers Sener rEres riees mL ee reese ree
BEES C5534 FESES) -AS5 FRAG ET SSS heees Sanh | OnSes SE NRG CESE4 ESSSS EN. Vs ease FES
Saks cepad beses Cues beess boeas beees boee | Seees canes Os BES Rees Ete 4 tees p22
bade be eed peees oes boged ba cee beeee tbaa bases seaae ca besbeees eee bheses bee
SOSS SSESI CREE. (ESS) CSSSS Laas PSSST Ses eek Sl Col5s FSESI PeSEs res, 2 rsess se
OSs ROSS E CHESS ORES LETT FSSSS POSSE REM 1 FPU0s PeOEs OSES PETES POS. <8 88s Fee:
POC ESt eS Peeer-- “62 FS Sas FOES — SUESS C8888 FSS es Fees —- Peet eee
Sets roses Pees cory cares Seuns leest prey -woed beess seges Fessy 1. si bases bes
COFFEE PETES S8SE FEESEFECEE FEES ECE FOOHE CORRE HOPE E hE G Ee Fae 4 beeee Ree
Eads cates neeesh cas pesas Saass bases esse | Casa temas eases bases re, Jo aeses cae
SORT OPTED Tees) ces PERes beens Heese Tere PSews PEERS FETT FESS? Ey) ST Penes fer
Beds OS 555 eh pes S555 bodes FSSa7 Leese cece bese s dbedi estes cases cen ib beses bee
SEresstasrgses hogs posts basse esses pied | teers teres roses eased red [4 bases tts
SESH Cehaa PESOS Uete beeee bSaes beSSS eae beahs OPESS Coheed Leaed hes ba heeee bee
Seal PSSSS LSLSs| Liss eeel ecaasakaec ceed cases sonal secna hoses ral peceaes eee
Os Feeed PETE]! SSes Coees Feues PPEES Owed SEnES Sones Deees Pease bps En Dewees See
POE OTEEE OS Ee CEEE EERE Reed EEE EE EEE Che Hd EEES OFS PE 4ES OHA HE ORO Ree
Seat eeres cates were frees ttaat seers tres lceens tenes tapes teathe rey ja trees bee
bbs OOF44 Peeks F048 betes PeeesTebEs FES bGOes OF OES FO bE8 FOG Ee bee Ja Rees 44
Shas cnsaa bees) has teses tseettsssivend csesssneesonenn eeres be soreness ree
omen teres Trees th, Pt peeee tenes teres rere (Peeps ereee trees Peres y pau teers eee
SESL LESS PEELS bP Dobos aS Saag PSea a eds PELE SESS LES ss Pesos b Sao hoods ae
POE COREA OOOO! FEF EEEEE FEES HEHE PEED | POEESEEREE COREE FE EEEE PH. HEE OOOO BOE
Reds shoes beeen Lees heees beaee haeee ead | paaes then sane beaee hod | teees bam
SSS saSe4 DESES SESS CESS OSS55 CSSS1ESSS CSS CEES s SOSEn bESSS Od 1S SEES CES
CUILIDTTI LEED SEED DLIT LETS RELY ES Eg EET STEAL aa Ee
bods eesai veces 2223 beads peas bhest pim J ecard sabes cated pases jee. Seeee pee
Oe 60444 EERE - Sesame eee —~2 $2555 SSES8 £5558 Feeey phere eee
PESO RESEEEEEEE wowed FIRES OEEST CEE EL EETD 606858 COREE ROSES EES wm LE RwO OE EES
Desi ceeds cbaed Ghd beaes coaad heebabeses boast sane pense bases BD? -Haeees bee
Sane Fetes Herre) Noe Feces Feees Sees Cee | SE SSS Hens Fesns heres te At eeses vee
ANNs PORES ERE ES / CEOS HERES REESE FERRE EERD Frees Chen Reed Hee ee hy, Ed betes hee
BNNS 0004S POSES Fees bOGSs FEES s KEES FORE | FO085 CRKNS OO8KE REG Ee DPS ln bees Fee
LELUEDESS CLIET| STS LSIELITSEE EET Ehes | EPELIEEMES EEres eae bes ners ttt
ESS SSSSS ESTES | CSSa FSSSS PSSSS CSSTS SSS | CSSSS SSE SS PSSST SS SES PSs is Sass bis
Leet Re eed HOSSs! POs CRESS EOEES HOSES Bed | SERS? EEUES ROSSd PaeOS PEE Pt oznes bee
POR CSPTEPETOR | OES TOS Reus Peeee Peed | Fents SHOES Ooees Peake hes thee TD age
POE O—FOE Pee ed COG | 100 Fheee Pee RE FOOT bee — lrede Oona se FOG b4 Fen leew Cl eee
SRGSSSRS4PESES BES 308 FORS4 Paes FESS | bas — Ceees SARS PASSE RES (5 Fes oee
Sees cates heees SSE} 330 SSSS2 CESSES RS SSSES SSS PSSSE OSs shee 5 eke
SULT LETTS LET TT YEE LEEE EEEEL PLE LESS EEG EEE Naas ree tar Es
SEE EEE NS Sa hes boas ees rhe? 2a, Sones peed baaes © -“* tan at
ee. se cee. ae
SSS ESSS4 PER RT. \oba FECES FES=S PEEES RET, \ FEnNS FOREs FSEES PESTS BK UE bewes Bee
fonascetes roses. sna tcees taasabeese SuSt. Cues Seees Sneed posea pan ls tesss Fae
TR ee ceees reser ees reese Pesos reres seeey ferw? PSREe Peres reses tees Peers rs
Sets ea tas bEseay sea paaestresy iaesseesey igeea Shuey ceces pases ses U tess eee
FREE SET) CERES _V68 breee Fee et Heme FREES “<08) Cee Ee Fe red PEGS FER, ~ Sees bee
sods eee adqee bedes bane ba- Jon} eees betes batt tf . .. 28 He
PESSS Senwe wanes .. 4 babes bones bows Uaaal cues penes Lhselh. a euces ban
ORET CSTE TIES D STE PRE ET Peaee RET TE SEE FeTTS SENET Fe TEE SHTeS ETE in Seeee Fete
beees ESESG LOSES Coes TESST PE EST NEEES PEt SESE PEUSS FEESS Cewes Fd. Aa peeee Fee
eegnesess erred § SEs roses soes sees ors reeed tents petes pores ert 49 reset ese
ROH OSE EES EE h 4Oe beets Petes HOEEE EERE CeO eEEROEe Reeee rea ee he) la heees bee
Bess cbse bases a ess besss based basssesee bhabs bends bese bases bas (nu beees bas
SEs EPPO Pbers H ows PBEee Seued HeEet PeSy  HeeeT Sous FETE" Hewes Fe? tne paes tay
ESS SE SS5 CESSES SE ees FES SS BSS 7 PE bed eed | eoee 5 beEds estes FUS55 Fbh 63 POSTS bes
Sestssessrhssas egg tease tdaed gest ines beret ceess retea egsie rea ie hiaes tte
ShSH ESSE ER EOS F OSs bones Peas PSSSE Rabe) Ceeeh ens FObSa PETES Tae \U bom ee bee
pomat rates hoses s oes reass baearssesssens| Cases Cannes seaes betes bed iseeees eee
Lenns 5 SSeS ERSES DUS PASSE Bones FOESS PRT) ESTA CSERSESESS EOOSS EET /M FREES ESS
POSS EEEEAOE4OST (FOE ESEEEEEEOS NEESER EEL , O4083 08084 60444 LOGOS PES EP eeee EEE
EGds Ooeed hea ry Oba breast beens Peres 1) of Beebe Coees COTE Pete ete bs brane be
ede sehed peer, SOPSE PSSSS Poesy PoSse $5 <4 Soars Soebs Feees FESSs fo ‘ty Soses bse
Sas based peoes Coes bosses saaes bones nde. \ hanes GhoSs Satan Panes baa Vo tenes bee
TEEN URTSIPRETT TAN TUET PeeeT reeset rete peers teres teres Peres vrs ‘a prere cae
SOMOS EE EHO HEE NEUES OO ERE PERSE EEE) PHOETEEHETEEEEE FEE ER ERE SRO R EO +e:
e545 b5344 bRSSS Hh NOS FSSSS BOSAL HOSES ROSS) bSSSs SORES CEASE FESES BOS ¢ heees bee
Cede be eag PE eed> Jan heees beans Leese HOTS) Sees thnbs banes beabS ROS eles bee
poees aay vex beeee ceSee BS $34 S506 beten Pease es “ass baa
Plt LEH SLE ilies MIN EIN III EMI
bade teaad Desde Gea bees bemas DREth Libp stand somes eeeed bance les (bases bee
ESS CSSSS POSES) S855 bESOS FE ESS FS EES FEM ¢ PEREG SSEO) C5484 FEES FE/ {5 beaes bas
SESE ESOS FESES , THEE POSTE FOESS HOSTS FEN, f HERES EEEES FOOSE PEs OD Fs ee b@Oee Fee:
Saas hoods HSSes \ Has Leese Poses NOSES Pees  beees Sones FSSSS PaaeS UNL IH hSees cae
eA 8e co ses Peeee Ft ines poses Beene bores Coes | Peery Sones Penes Pewes PEy jt pecee bee
Gabe Reade FESS 5 ides bee es beans hawed peed | ben] caus baken Fans bhi 6s peees ba4
Bede weed beeee sed pened bead MMOOS EEE? | Cen es CEE eee baaes FE) bs pesos bee
HEBIESS DSRS BE SH EB Ee teh
PeeHPSSSOSPTEL ENTS L Sere Pereeresre ree al eres errs ererr ler eri Si reer e ese
SESS FET25 hOSSe y HTS Lees: Fes2s BEETS RFRG | F2RSs CFEES RETE5 bESES Ot Ch beSEE ESS
OTe TEST Petes A ES POSTE RSS FEPSS LESS | FeRes E00) Fewes Peaea HRS D5 hewee Fee
SANS LESS] beady nba beedd bhend bbbed boy? | Coeed oeaet teead based ia) huteesd bee
PeeRSSSSSS PE EEE SPA EOESS EORS4 EEE SE LT +5 OOREAEESSSESAEEEESES OY 4 ESESS EEG
SOEs vases pesin Cases beces beens Cawss Li Via peeee seuss seees beses ol (astenes fae
Pees PeTed TTR Anes Peers Pewee Perel re. rears Peres Terese frees Pe) Br veges ere
FETS CREE CER ERD \NPA ESTES CREST PERSE RASS USEED EEBAA EPaea DaRER Tas Valea eS Eee
eee beard beaee te HePperttitertitrertyrr PESO FERRE EOOOT PEGE EHD CRORE Ree
SETS ES ERT PESES FH SES EESES FS ESS PESTS FERS) FSESTFERES CSEES EESES FET (S PES SS ESS
Sasscesescetesp saatesstsseeasseascses peasisneascenescernseeeCapesesees
age sese- —— (A259 BESS BEERS Peee- ——— ST eeEES FUSES SESES Pes ees Bee
= Ved fesse ttese ito: —< GGnPa PRESS EE PES PES ES ve renee tae
OES CHEST IEE DS Fee beaes Peens beens LEAL Saeed CP eet teres begee bar hh taeee fae
Seiiererd tierd ets reete beast hetareg cz ctret itirt ceted chert te fe price ire
BOGS ELSES EESED | SESE PSS PSAEE eSed had <2 SeSRl SSS) Eases LESS rs Ci GesSi as
Sees Saeed FEGSS | NGe PETS FeaEE Senes Far, )peneT Peees EEEss FESes Ty, Ft feces tee
Ses ee FSd ERSSS o CGS PESTS EGESS BEES Fess ged SS iss regs Petes Di iverst rr:
POR EOAAAFEEESY NOES OS FARO S ROPES BRO posed obbes bboes hboSs bl, ba Loess 626
Beas bases easy bas boaes beans HOSS4 bbas | boasd bbGGs bab45 baES 4) Oa bodes bas.
beds teees heeed d (hos tease bones henns bees )reehd Sones sense haaee ti) ws beees baw
OURS Feees VESee Fh Nes Fee es Seuas Perey Pees \esees Senne reves Fears fy) WE EEeTs Bee
ePerrorereererarersssetesrrepesticcy Ritretre) rrresrristrer emits tet tes
COS eSTT ised s ye Sars hsses tshes read esses tends cota hse rts tat hee
Deen Gaba Leaedh ead —* Nae peees baeee eee [pea lekee canes hawes hal heh (ae
ras Ss SS} (hes woes Fae Ss SS | bee Ces ee OE 8 Os 0*
Sana s PENS FEEEE Kees See eS REMY | TESST FEEDS Peas CRESS EST US EWwEs Eases eee Pee
Enda ( pees COGbe ChGSs bROSEOSed |p bESES bGEs beOes COGbt Oe] ba baaee Fhaad lease bee
O04] bees beans Peers fests bred bheees beeed peeee bones O64 bs races teers beens be
CAnG 1 (Sod b6Gb4 bOOSs Doe de Ree) POSSE FASE HOOT HOMOGE ed 84 hae Os AOE es EOE HE Oe
Sees) (a> SDS aa eeees cand) =~ s baeas ebaes ad + --=—— es feeae wae
Sos Nee es HSOaa ED [ee OPH EM bees PRES Oe eee Oe ee loads beeen ObH OS baUES PERds eeees H
+ OSES FOOSE NE HE OOS POO EE OOEES EASES He 104 FOS48 P4404 FOOSE RSHEL [URES SOOES H
ent tests beaesid he peeed Peeks ROGes Caene MH) hos beaea beens beaeahade? Lawes canee H
OOo ROPES Ew EE He Es OEE SE PEST PER EY FeeeE Y Pes Saas FE aes PETES KEES Fees FeeEe H
SES EEES HEE AOE EREOE FORE ROE ES FRESE ASSO HEEES OO O88 ESSN FEY CREOe RETEST
Bes ibebd Goads. (ae ob04 beees FObbs RESed odd 0088 bb404 babes bed. i pebds bESSS ti
SOs PETES NSS58 tL 'ted ESSEd Pe ees PSSSs SESES HEE HESUS PSSSs HSeeE bees ‘eeses ESS2¢ Ii
Sot neeed $2008 FA Vee noed DOehs COREL CHESS h \HOe teOes Pethe beet haeh Sehes eehas h
MILI I LUI NIL SII IIL NII I
Fos cease besuaen les eaeed peed panes spees t ecastirtisertisrstisssaaetitresess|
ASt heeeh boaS4 af {40 0000d bOnss PObEt hens) Wad haeies £5484 bOees bene) (hEus REtes
O06 0008 Bed reed 4 OO4E POOEE b ORES O81) SEEN NEOES bO404 SCENE HAS | VOES Cee eS
obs bees be "51nd booed beeba beRes Thnes bb08 boeee bee —«+obns caaee &
ere PPPs Pheer ce CET PPPS PUREe PSRES Peter cE SSeS Peees Peete reer 7 ht eeees
Obs Seed RESUS EN (PG FSS Ed bee es POG as OeET L B04 FbONS beaGe Peeed beets Thad e babes H
S83 Veses boa09 £2 ina Cores Fears pees seeees ros haere beaes poeed bares (ones heres fe
Teh Pests ChSS3 4 A HEHSd ered teted ceeds ses chads eedes teesd egies coed reeset
Ted beet’ bases ts Li bbeed cebbs wakes C4284» Led) beads bbbes hbees heal bOlls deze b
TEs OSES NESTS 8. NSE FEST EEE PSWES FETES. ESE LETTS OFSSE FPETE FENT? UP Ere Fees A
mee E See Sed BE bee eee l POO he RoE Es Oeeee dH PEs EEES RORGs eee Bama Chats Reeee H
SSS SSSSE S553 Ff OPE OPETS PSENS ESE ES FESES | Fees 1 SSee PSess PSSSs ESN OT /pRne CSSes fH
SES CESSES SSSS EL he OSSTE TOSS RSOES OHSS | PFSS UESEK FSESy PESTS RSH EE leas geese H
bos 06554 0bSS4 0S lee beds BhRSs Ooh ee ee SSS | FESS PoSds DoS SoS NEES LEKES OES
Tee ee TTT ETT) POE PTET PTET TTR ET Tere PETER Tees Pe een reeen Teme Exwre weree hr
Peseisssrisrtisiteistseisssiititetstismeriitettiterttsssetscisisiiseesess
TEs PSST: Posse f) Jes Feees Pees: Pease Teese! pers teens SraEs FESes Poet) poses Frese F
ehiscsirithitetrhesstisteatetictrepiatessitettiterrisresied ttetretresss:
Sas ieess beads Lead beeed bondi neces sass Lenses boned heeds bbe bad, 4 eked Bbbes
TET FETT ST PPR EEA "AF PTR SS PETA PTR ET Ee Pe, Lotes Fees PETES PERSE ETE. Pe RHe Serer FH
OOS OE es SOO Eh, Hes EE SE Fabs PORES ee hE. POEs FECES PEE EE PEEEE ENE, PRRNS OaH ES H
$33 SSs3 testa ch les sds toesd betes cosdts pbs cgbes tases tess canes boesd sesett
Set OTE he SSS be Hird Peed PER he PSR es Saeeet besa hehad peaee beeen faguel bende baeee W
ees SSeS SEES EY bd ood SSS bebe sd elas S58 SSS d bees e bE SS Sle) Lebds oa sea
FOe POET PES | 488 FERS S OSE ET OER EN TENTS SENT PETE F FERS e PERT T He hES ENP Cree F
oes eens Sd ~- Ewe bowel OSRES PEERS =~ LTESS heees Fees bewet ———— (aenws eaees
eet heeeans a beeed beeee PRR. ——28 (0008 Pees bee... ~*~“ Se Beene H
SSS ESTES SSESSS PD (HE FSSET ESSES ESSSS ESTES Cv 5s HSSSS FFSS45 FSSSS FERS ESSE FETES FET
Ses cess SeSus bind beees CESS SSESs seeesr lose leeEs BSESe SESS ESUEL CERES EESSS HB
Ve POSSE eT T ne Te TEED eRe Pere PTT EEF ITT e Pewee Pe TSE Tees Pee ET TTS Te Tee
$53 SEEES TTD YS ESS EET ET EE ET EE Ee: Eebrerttety
OObOebs bEENGE 144 OO ROR EE ROR OEEEEOe BOGE NOObe bOO08 OEOS POee CRUE REESE H
SSS POSSS FESES E) NSS CFSE 4 PSEES FSESS FFSSS ) USSS ESSE S 55555 555545 FESS) FSEHS FEES TI
SS4 FSSSS 65505 F} NSS £554 FESS SSSS4 FESRE! F508 £FE04 FSSS5 FSES4 FEES CEEES EESSS H
$94 OSES FOOSE FSS POSSE PERSE ESESS FSSSF | F955 54845 55905 P5555 1450 PEEES FSSES H
S56 FSSEs ROSES FT NSS FSSSS ETERS PSSST EESES | F555 FONSS FEES FSSEs SES OSESS FEE ES H
Ot HPete Cees © Gee PEERS PERKS PORES CHEST C808 FERNS REESE PPEOT LER CORES EE PES H
OO8 Nees POOH E NOE OF004 PEED SOON OE OSS be BOEE P4004 FS4EE PSST EE ED CORE C4 SSS H
Set iweed beasay (194 PReed benet Oebet Ebeet Seed baeee POOEE POSE t berth  benee ttees
Set heeed Prete’ Set ewes Pee es Peat OwETs Ceeet Lheee heeas Pewes Pek’ s Penet eoeest H
SSS POSES S547 CSS S SSS PESES ESEOS FSS) VERSE ESSE ESSSS BSESS EET (A ESEES FSESS H
SIT TESTELTITT NIT LESS ELTELL IEEE IETS ESTE LETS ELT EEE ST SS SE tie!
22s Hates b4404) ned boone be eee +440 (ESb5 bae44 beoee peead hath \ESeHS eee H
Soe HeSSs LESS HCAS ESEES SEEM POdOs POSES) SESS LOSES bS4S4 NSS DEEL Comet SaeESH
FOO Sete CST OE 6] NTA PEE ROK ES ETRE CESS PSSA Eeaee PEER ETT SI TEs CeEes eT Ere
S33 Hoses Epes t/ Aus beces beans cones ceees) Pees Fo880 peaes beses bens cones ceese F
BEE NESEE RDF ~ SEN RG ERE NESE EEE EEOESL? DAOAKY EOS FORGE POSSE POEh, FERET TTEES H
O66 (bees O40. — Thiaed ~ “pd beens bones LSS, :tega') Ube beeee babel LOLS” pep” \eeee b
Sos 525845 sTaes yh wed Se85S BEEK - 200%. | + nes seeea Ba. — She.’ ones &
PSati asi EtereTIROtiepeeLessetetteis+teaerl capa ttieretesr tT eteahed Temes st]
eee meee Oba Fi hae 4 beeee pened eaeee (Ane? 344 beens bende td bel Ten sse88
Fos beeea eee! 24 deed ORES PRR ES OHS ~Su (00R8 b2eee beeeS br a3 bees
obs OG844 PSE EE ELSE OS 204 PORES hOOSS FEEES I Ted bGGUs Pena e he eeT EERE (306s eres H
BSS ESS 655424 67 655 ESSSS OSSES ESOG8 C2584 FASS OSSE0 65504 ESES1 KSEE AHbES 04528 F
Tee OTS TT RUST TF) ee PF eST Per ET FEN eT TET es A ines penne Prees De eEs Deer, Senne eee ne
Ses oeettrectae| a4 POE ed FeRSE ETE mI SF heSeh 406 bends DeeaT POET DAeY) Penne Fetes
SSS $5555 FETE E) H-4 CSSO Hl PSSSES FSESS FESSS 4 (455 F4SN2 SESS ESSEG FESS) PERUSE F048
SEL LIETE TITS DEEPEST EE EEE ese eres LETS es ete! Rete hire
O24 beeee edaed 2404004 2006) 60004 eoes S044 deed boo Oe Oe! bE ede
© PECTS PEDEE TD NZ8 Pewee COONS PUREST EERE 4 [YS Crore OTEEE PES es REET, Peers EE Ees >
Os heeds hROSS h fas bSSSK PORES PShbd beers) 4a Keaes BOERS bbeSS FEES) bebee hha’ &
O90 (S884 18004 &) N28 F9SEE PORTS ESE8S FESS Y fees S408 PEERS PRESS FSD CRE Et FOESS H
PIosreserrerrrs@trre eel ec retell ericccigcter Tri eter icles itr emiel reece
S2o HESES SSS02 CA es ESSSa ESSSS ESSE LSSES Loss BSSas Less ESSS Iss s ESEas Sessile
TES PESTS CERO E NT INE HSEES SOONER ET OEE ED NES PES Ee OT RSE ETE ST THT SENOS Cees &
S53 fesse beans by F53 vores coars coeed Soves hy Vos henge eyans beset racr> ters ceees f
S53 Hoses eens by fad based books bases ooees hi ros vende bogus hosel baeey wees setae &
SOs OOS bESEE K) 904 OS04 FS eed PORES FObee Co 15d O4EES OSES S POSSE PEO DE! ieee Oebe4 H
Sos Gbesd boauS > COS boSSd DEESS RRNA AL) =) 555 bdSOS bOSSS SRSA GADD” LObES bedeS &
wettest wm 2 RSET RTS —_—_- aoans 86809 D9 TT PPee — —==n§ PEPET PEers ft
Tee eset pees See era renee a LYESS PETS PeTTE Per Fa BROW FeSee
S33 Seees toe ~n44 bene! peers eke... “Eee #0808 PO805 Fbo2~ SERN bewee ht
See eee bectat bedbeeed boobs weeed bate ur bEa bteds ceded teed REST! (tees teteet
Bod OsSd booed 404 hoes d ReeAd ceed Robes A! nbd b4n0S beOEd bESE Deeds (bees beeSS
TOt FSET CT ETS 944 WEES E PENH HER ET EEETT Y! FET CERES PESTS PSSRS PERRY Nee EeEws H
esdscssthsittimetisteiiassticisstsssateresttsttassiatsssstent te vent eeteeh
Ses hosed hesits 1) 299 PES! bores eshes csees ds cee heaes peond peed pene. yeews Erte ft
See heeee Reeds L Has OSPOd PORE ESE ES ESSE F Des Hanae Pehes REeSE heited \Abee Oeees H
Bs CS505 RESbe b See SSSSS OEESASSERS CESSES FSe bESas PSEes PSSTs SESE PEbSS EES
TTTITIT Iii LLL
SSeS E Pema e388 OOOOH Pew ed OOOO Cee es Y lee OO ONs POEM EEO) DO we! bees eoees ti
$33 }eSes 8393) § 039 Perel beets Pee es seaes | (aes hosts Poees beret peor! beers sores |
PTUTISSCRISICE MMI EPeti eli cecil teretiseM lier trl i ster ties seis times stresses
S52 $055 bosses Cae eSSes CSebs CSESs LESESS [oes eeSs oS3S4 POSSE SES TSESs EELES
FPS STS TEES AES PPPS! FSR ES PEWES CP OTT? Cues Ne aTs PPSSS beway VFR! SS ETS Press fh
OOF NOSES EEE DD See POOH RP Ord POR et eees tee HOObe Pees PeOes hat Pehee beeee H
OSs POSTS TATE OD [ES PeRSs SESS OSFES FEF ES) Tes Fees RES SS Fe Res ESS. \ Senne Fetes H
EIEIEIIE VEEN LES PST TT ESTE CEST CELE LES LENS CeTes PETS Est TREES TEES
Ss 5555s Fees bh) fan Reese OSESs ROSES SESSS Ay VSS CERES FESa Ss hSSSd ESESY HESS ESESS HI
Tattestbettti@rtistesliattietiatticstipridietifiettteses ieee atta ited]
ees lier hetrraiertistss ists ity isrii ssi ye tisade peeee booed bam sete bhbee ti
St eee ee eee
eee eee, . —* <2 45s Pewee Fe ——~==< eaes peers free, — ——<64 seus erees net
oor Keenl tEa>~ 7a beees bbs RCO eee bees baeed hae a2 Pe Oee OSees |i
PEF EPSSS PSST — AEs POSSE PEPE PSR RT Exee,  FE5 FEES FESS S PSSST Eres EET Feees He
oot peeee heaae © cbehessslesiaiatisbiassda Eos poate teeee beeea baeel tees eeeee &
eos bosses Sas F054 beeen Pea es PSE Es OSeeeH HOS bb eae PS408 PoSee be ees (MES besos HL
SIEQESTE LING ES TEE EDT CETTE TEESE EETET S| SEE HT aes ert ftis
Set heeth heads A” dae RSead hones Sebes FSSSSY Se heeeS RESas Rea nheeel Whos eebes H
O04 SOSTE OSES D094 ETESS HOOKS SE RES SESS D VTE ESSSS PETES ETSES HEME Veues eETEE
Pat besadbeteeweetd essa laseeded daderietapedpetediecedecsa bebeemed aed essed
Sos Geese setae SSs PSsad PSSes ced es Pesos ats USSss eESSs sel Sea ais tesa
PES NSSESHAHNS © C24 POSES ESEESOTETE CRESS S [NOS FSS48 BEEOS FPESS ETRE (RE OS Fen Re H
Bos Nees s Ubebs F456 boeOd SEES FORE CebSs | hood bSEds bead ROESE NEES! bones seaee
SOF SSRTT FETT F nes SSESS CERES FeRet Peres | Pees Sones Feeet PeEed rene) ceees teres #
tSittessttitrdeitthetetitssstetietisssabestedterticstetesestetpbeteetesssd]
206 SSS4 O42d4 F, '004 HO SOd eee bEEEt eeSet) CEOS Fede Petes beees teat! Sends Seees ti
SSS POSES ESSSS F. $55 FSET DSSS ESERTESSES CS545 FSEES FFS5S ESSE BEY CEES ETERS H
SSS HSSTEENSTR BA RS POSSE POSES POOST ESSE (FETE FATED POSES PERSE DEE CEES SESS I
SPT NE TSs PESTS hy [we PESSy POTEET PeNET Petes. Hees CROs Pree Frees ress Raber trTe|s Hh
$53 [esse $4003 5) ion. 2] Pees’ poeed Saeee k ‘pe ..* noe boabs bees Feaes Van. pees f
Bos heads Raaien 5) 140 ct hd beuss peees cases a) bt. tube Reaes beees ReKES ined (hoS8 i
SSS USSTSNTERTD) 49} > Sa ESEES pee es Seees y) Fix- Suee peges beseseses) | 4ay- noes ti
O06 beSes beeddt Sa)” sed eeees beeed seees> Le shee bodes beens Ses) Sa. eeees W
SSS FESS SE we we ES STT PORES ESTES FE, Whe PSEEE ESET ESSE Eye. oes OeTET
oes peess teaud . °—- Sane] pease bana) emt=: “sa Seau0 peaes beees I - <dhss eeees Ft
O22 TELLS PITS aca CET PTET TEES ces TEES TNE (EBS EET aca7 eerrrtn
SOs Neeee Peers Elzi booed beens beeae ETE obe4 14044 heeee bees Gabi <raak eens
354 0SSSS RESSS 2554 FSS54 LSESA ESSSS SSSSS 5554 1OSS4 05424 S554 FSS, C5055 2ESES
Ree RES Ss CENTS) RST PES PEE ES SUES CRT RY (wets Ceeee REEeE PSSST Tees Sewers eEeee
Ses bess ea84) lias Koaad beeed bones cees” Loess litses Feces beeed Ent, Cents cases
BOs SSSEe NSaTE > 845 ESET FOO HE SEES OE40. TESTE EEE bESa8 DESI bees Beene PT ees
SES Poets Oks | 944 PE EST beehE Pe hes Fed sy [oFss LOeds bbSeq PeEe! pews ‘bones FEES Yt
fae beset eeest (had peee: wees: caret teres ears tants ceasstessieees seaeecetes
SES TESTI ITENS. CT3 LEST CSEED ESEEY ISTES (SEER TELE ITESEITEST ISDS CSET2ILTET!
Piss tose heh pope Totes elesisy terest sai seer err serer steel sieare verse tes
eeeee ese ee wes eelsces ereeres  errecc mre cos erissel siete siers mist eeeses es
#20 boSek Caa4s! oha4 beS0d Denes Seed Coe es (oeed FeaUs REERK bees bees ESEUS Eehes
eee peser ere Pie eer reser rest Tiere eres eter eer rire re ler erie ss met Ter ets es
See OSE ES NOSET WEES PSSST FERTS PSEET FETE [FTES lOoes POSES FSPOn Heee ConTs SeTes
SPe S253 UIST | \SS9 PSSST poe es beset crees /oess loons posed Frees pews ;pseas cetes |
S22 $5333 bSad4) Sos booed beets bones teen, Aedes beats beaes teees bees (bebus sees
Sp itsst Sete pf SST EEESU EEE rele eess deere esti tess etait iit:
$66 66004 bdbde) hod bod Od Oe ood. Pebdd beedd booed OES d ded) bees codes bi
OFT PER ET PSSSa) FETE PETS OSE FT PER ET CPTT) [Peed EFTTT DETTE PTET Seer Creel EP TeT
RES NSTESASSAS BAUS OFEST PERS: PEwOs Cated lOSes NeSws DSSES OSES ESTEE ESUHS 22 ees h
UST SS ST ISTE Maer res esi ieeelel sere l rem erel Trrrrerriereci sree ser rrses
COC SESE ESSSS SES5 OF ETS THES PORES CESS! feteE hones FNESs FP PTT FEET. SORTe Frere H
es cSSSE F4RSs Noa OeSS a ESE ES REE ER dees “Tes lbbde Pesan eeeeune > Jada beeede
one Prete teee™ == Peers Peere Penne ~ or OOe SPST Petes Peres e- =~ eeTee F
SSLUESER USES TITLESESI REELS CSEEL ceaas 1UST3 20509 65203 LeESe See! cocce tees e
CONSE NEETH F908 COGN ROOHE FOREN Peal LOREEN EOES POOO4 FOROS Ndeay ESHER EOEEEH
TES PPSTIFSSET S594 PSSST PETES PSRES TTTET (ESTs Fens PTees FR eeS TTT, Peres TeTes
Ses c22es bease, h62s SSSSd VERSE ESES SAL) (S508 FSEEE ESTES SSESG USES Renee eens h
SES SSSSS FSSSY © F455 ESSSSE PSEES BSESS FEED, YESTS FEES S 5555S FSSSS SER! PESTS ESSE
S59 18955 82988 Liss Poets Esehs sees teres loess fees ftess Frese test ‘seegs cetes
Cet NOsee Cheam MNOS PSSDT PSU Ss ESESSESSED OSee ESSE ESEEEETEDS FES) bones ceeee 1
Pes Se eR ISteAR Se LELesealesselettetsessdietetesitdesttleseelstadietasiesses
2a¢ heees bea25! 40d 4 bSSSd bOESs PSESS SESSs DOES b4EUE bSESERSSSLESER FEEUE SEES HD
SSP NSUST Sere Pese PSHE: Saws Peet Ceee! (Noes Peete PeSS TP eSNe rere Sense te ees
FSS PSSST CFUEE ESS FESS T PEE FSEST FSETS [SESS FERNS SSeS TESS PSST PSRDS FFERS Ti
SES HESTTNSGTY! NGSS FSSS4 PSE ES PERSE FSSS4 COSTE TTY S FOGRS ESSST ESEL BERNE S2ESS H
O29 HOSSs Needs URSs POead PEEds Pees Fetes 1dSes feeds boars resend heen besws fesse fi
22a Besse Roses | ans c5200 Feed £5534 bases (2Ses boSee 2204 SESE ESES! FSSSe basse Ae
Fe SETS FOR ae bY SS EEE EE ERS e OSES s OS TT, (FESS ES SHS FEESS REESE ETS | PEE ws eeewsT H
SS3 Sooes lisaiss &, bas beesd bases baess cast Kboes 0338 828s boas bent < bobis Fe9e3 f
TIRTStEEERLEEMT Eee eet Deets Lad bataaecesettaripeeeed eset debemettedesssgy
SS URSEENSENGS (had HORSE bbees bORES FOE, VeSSs NSEHE beeea EES U heey bebke 4548 Hi
SEF SESSS COmSL LES4 USESS OSTHS OESSE SESSA bess FESEa ESSE RSESE NESS! ESTES BESS
TittseehttitBttietetitiselciictisst betel iititiertesstiitiaeiatdeseey:
PeSTteseher treet reset icsssictisreses we sseliirr titer pets iti tas seesess:
SES NESTE SSSNS ORSS4 SSSS4 CESSES SESS SETH” (ESSE 1SSSS FSTSS SSS OSES) COS SEES Ht
556 UbSSCS F5G05 . ~=4 howd CS5bs PONSA SES. lau UeeGs FOSS" hOewS SERS OEE wS H
S56 56esasee--— _ keesl Esees banei = rowed 555485 6525 6 5SSS5 Co 1 sees &
SST KOSER ETAT S HUST ESE ESSE Pen es Peery FETs Ceeee Press beeesueen errs reeesy
SOP NSSEEESEAN F004 FEHOd HOMES ReRet Seerd Leeds Obeds FEeae Rene) bees) Fehte cated li
SES CSSSEFESEL FASS SSSSH PEEES ESESS FSET (55545 FSSNE FSSES FSSSE ESSE FEES ESEES H
S86 POSTS TS4A) LASS PSST FESS OSES E TESS, LOTS SEES FEESS PERSE EaEH, PORES FFSSS
COt weet HOAOA\ GU8e POeed Rees POREE EHO) \IOEENSOES FOOSE DENSE NG Oe Sees eee H
POS TESTE TEETH FATE TREE TPH ET Pen ES TET ES eee FRETS Pt Ree Freee tere epeoy nT Tes i
ROOREEEEPORS Shed: <SREREES CREASE SES (SPREE ARS Reewaerese tens BEA | eebee
Seeleesdsbeun Sees "20 beeen 6000480088 (28d Nb0 66806 OSes F8n8 See, kee F
biblssefitiom i etieprabestabetti testes tsp tisett ister | sti aeseeesed |
Sad bess bees FEd5h- Nd boobs bOSEL SERRA \ESS>- NOdbSSSSESSSI NESS Sane Uses &
TOs LESTE OTST RAITT. CR ESELE CSET LETEs (ERTX RED IEESE TERT ERED. Peay Cie?
S23 1ESE3 ere! | 2929 1 8) peers reees caves Leeri . cas beses breed pase; keel \ eres tet
os bees bee 3 Pdvad PORES PEREE EEC 08 05908 ORES CERES EC eine OOnee Heel
PEt ESSE POSTE AUS OSEEH FP OOO4 POO REESEEE BES4 EGGS 4454 4SSE SED EREHS GSS ESH
ons pense beads! (aac nened eaebs bebeseetn! (ones Chnue beaed bebe hens | benns sabes H
SBS CESS PSR ey 1548s SESE SES SESS PEE H, LETS FEET OEE ES Pee Se EES, weet pe eES
S54 ESET NERES, [206 FO58 1 FS0FF FEES ESOS? FOES 14444 F0808 bOSSs FRE? sh ES ReeeS H
$00 seeks dada s \3u8 eeeed heakd PenethSSee SHES 4688 Pi bes Cees bend’ Cehie Rhee ti
$95 ESO E TEATS 6 494 FESS DS OFS SEEDS OESSS) FSS FEES FESES ETESS ESHA ESEGS EERE |
224 heSSd 64004 b) OS4 PORAU UOTAS bSESS ASS48| b4kS b4O0S FS4NS OSSS1 SUE POSES FESR K.
POELetetetll ioe lists isstalelishitreticteltettisettictetiitetintisiistetic
S55 FSShs Dongs E Ax Foes poESs BERS Face - ree bo 5es bosed Pees F2-—~ bens tebes §
a26 55688 vd SEEPS PEERS DERE GY —-shSs 0088 SERGE bGReG. --~-=5 keene ft
Tess eae een
wa con's hoods D404 beeed bees bensi coeel, PSS £2006 posed based beee | ESSE sees
Poe FRO es PSE RE Bet HFSS H POET Denes cates! SEes F FTES RESET ETETE PENS SEH ES PEERS H
$OSSs PEGHE D SSS bOObd RSEOG POR Es ESTES OO54 FE SHS FF505 bSObS REEE PORES bees
een Teese £2005. tend Beeed Reece ceees ceter Seee loses taace beans esr. Prert ee tes
PITT TTP SI TIT er eret rere rete sees eererisr i ii iise test itr eerel teresess
S52 beets Caress, Cas krres venti eenateers: Ears hanes prz20 etssi pend lezees eeees b
OSS FETS SSTs TASS PSSST PTET TTSES TRS, WEEE NOTTS DeSns ewes ESE | SSEEs SSeS We
25s Le554 05500 0 pas bbS00 0500400000 00000 $555 beds boa boRS ESO babes beens b
SPT NET ES NENTS b 448 FTTET Pere FP eees Fate) (Pees tees Crews Eanes EEN OF ene FETT fi
SSUES TS SSess bees pests ctets beep esses sees Usess cosas pesgs beds p seeds geese h
bs NOSES 5bSS4 b OSs bSSSE ESRSE BEES OEY [5044 64444 55544 b4504 bee) ORES OR SSS UL
Tey ESTs TAT TE GBs PPT EN PSO PT TENET ERE! "Pees PTET S Ee eee PETES Naw, A Pees eee R eH
See NORSEHLO44T [kee OFUEH OO OEE EEO eE Oe Re! Lbdes R4E44 Peees bedES bar! Leehts Crees H
£23 FES04 Esahs 2984 boeed PSEES ESE ES chee’ Speed Eoaks boee9 based bot: 4 eebie oee3 &
223 HSS04 2404S Shad bo00d Leeks F084 GES ( CoSes b S04 bSS04 £90045 FS 4 seeds based b
Bs ess bdo e (hss booed hoe ed ONO Oh ds hood OdNds be SNs OSS‘ BSR | BEEdS CAE
Tee OES e CPST KNEE PETES CERES PEERS TE EO CEPTS TESS PFET S PTR ES BEE! (PRO es Se Tw eH
SOs Cee Reaee h Nas bees beers ROE EE ewhO. ChESs COO es PEEa a ReeES TH, GOS Et ee ees H
ob+ POSTE HESS H RES OOS Od PEE OE ES CEN POSES OSHS PSSEe Pee ES OSE © PORE Coees H
TELHESTONTEIES LE SESD EET rethl tets: tere ngesa hses Hees Hee Steere sett
ob hose OSSdR Ss Ld bbe CORE Ok ed COED, 254) SEOs Coded bbe as be = Anke oeded
PRT PETee Feast Hes sees Pee ET Pee ee YH £909 PU S=2 FESS se FsaTe _<mS29 SPT es FP
see heert — <9 49 PE OSH PORES PSR RT A oo tttttheettioles here msaass
OOF NOOSE EEETs B24 8 FE PON PORES PORE ETA. —oerd HE0E8 PEGG 8 PEbES RET > rere hheet H
SES SSE ESSE (CS ESSSSLECED PEEL LEhr! GESE LIES EES settee JEEa retest!
250 Howse beans» (Lid pened babs bones beet) Cowes Heese OSES FEW bes. Uewnes seeee Hi
FET FSSSS CSSD PSS ESS TS FSEES FEET] ETE CESSES FSSES FESSS PSESS Per, YES EES ES EES
Ta TaseeteP PRM eee daiaelessahatispesembpacaitel tdaseedeseiiPraebed bedessad]
O04 Neeee OA ade |) \hbe OE OUd POO OE FORE s O4bs Fhe b bbOde bEOee bOOEN N45 (4 bende behest
FPS PSSST PSSST F585 FSSSE PSTET ESTEE TESS FSSES FEES ESSN ES FSET ES, 15 PSRs FESSs H
SSS Sess Ceaer t [4ad £8844 FSSES SSESS ESSA CESSES FFSUS £SSES FTSSE FEN 3 ESEUs RSSSs
Sus FSSSS PSSST leas FeRTS PeSSs FEES ESTY FESeS Sees beses Ferss Fay $s PSE t reese F
ES HSSSS FSSON) 4S SEES ESESS ESSSS SESS PESTS POSES FF ESS 55555 FED 2 OSES FERS F
SO2 EESTI ERTS FORTS ER SSd ESTES Sees SEsy Leese teens bssss roses cso ct cseas cesses
titessshtsrtistetiesssiesttletisteccatiesedtitibesttisseeherbedesredesest
S55 bbS55 b5054) Jans boeed SUSI ESEES COe7 HESS FSS FSS ASSIA NAM (SL eEhES bESSs L
55s SeSus Feear) Kose ESSE FeUeL TEES FES | UESES ESEEs LESS S FEES US) fs ESEET FSESS
$5 POSES EESEY /T354 HSSSN POSES ESESS Fe! (A NESSES ESE S F054 55508 bel 5 OeEHs FEEES HT
Soe pepe neanl Gaaad C5Sey peSey psy ee bry. cusses resus ceess cre sancy: | beeus cesses ie
TIES SSESLI CIM ELEIOSESIISCSEL Toler Reiser irr reser treet icra srrerer see.
O25 PESSs hee b has POSES OOEES PERSE Co Os | FESSS REESE PS ESS PORES HOS OF PORES DOSES H
Pet Pesce hearse hes Pee e! Keees Peret Cer Fetes Kees Pe ees Pee Ts wey Fa Peers Eeees
SSeS CTT SSe h Nak OeeeH PRES PON et eee beeen lebes FOEnE PRees ESS 1S PODS Fe Ree H
SEE LESTI ELLIS E Ss CEST SESS ESSE EO Seer cede bres teegs 3 tte ett
O06 ieees ba4s- len teeed beets benetG ——-beek beade beans beeae _< Senne eeeee &
$33 53508 S55 ESSSS 55556 SSUES 5 Aa Seees 55955 SSSR rene 3 esses
PUT NOSES ATT FUT OTT TI Peel reeet Pee crete peers Peers errr ya) ceeee er reeerh
pPeT Tesoro rr rere ec reser er yerer im rererier isertrerec itr mises csetees,
ee POSES RESSS S444 PESS4 FOOSE POE ESEFER 8 bO04 SEES FEAEE FP ORSS her RRR ERS H
OOs bESES Ceaes | £404 bdLSs PORTS PREBS ReOL 1 wet ses beens bbeesbed Seen ones l
Bos ceese coeen esas 28 SEES bans toe bee 456 6S4n8 beseebey Seek ones &
O88 pees creers S88 BEETS POE perce cores CESS CSREES EES fees cones PETES OPETS
004) 154 EOERE Fhaad Peeed Reeed [GKEE Fetes Wess HObds boan | SEEa FERTs beans Fades
sos | ses seaud 52994 Seeed bevel (ones os0es lieses seau2 boas | hesed baees Benes seees 4
S55) (HES PFE CPST TETRA T HEHE (oes Reese USSES EV OEs ESE | fSSS4 Fo RET Denes GFEes Hi
O06 1 inde hbaes £4004 ROn SERENE tems cheese Loeb’ 4444 £446 | owed bose bSRRS EERE
2506 FCUNHHHERA) [Ow eetee eee LASER GC PeRS badd ehEad bed) UEOSE SES CeeRd Ehdee ok
Seal PSNNd HOST -Lens Canes HOES beer «50088 PRESS 2Ge84r—_ __-~5 beees HHGRs ex
IEEE REESY FS> == EL LTTE LITT UESts PES ceeds eet Wg Ses Fs SSESy teees resets
Sesbheesd nd —sbbs beeet beses Noabs | ~~ Sebes Ohba Sees FES at) noS54 sedes ee
SESS FESS PSSST D (PES 6 5ES-4 HSSES FESES HOSEN TPSH PSTN SESS UESEE SOET | SSSES FEES OO
SECl FS SSH GSES) 7 OSs 6595 POSES FESSS OER 9 ease peeves $7 oes saces cot | races seses ca
Est hehe tsess goed csees beens tease iter! cones betad tees beeen ses «i tgees rises es
SES9 ESESH RSES TEES ESS ESTEE SETS FSSES ME ESS CRESS So ess SESS ES hy 3 Sess Hes ts
od OS 00k OSS ee) Os 58 SSs OES Es SOEs EEE OSES OES S 8beee CESSES ES) Seed beeee ee
PET Pewed Pees! bees retest feces trees livers \ered Peers teres terse rer: | Peres terre re
SESS Ferey bare) | S53 0SS53 heees (ese) Hesse isses cess sober Fsess Fens | bares S59 55 ye
SESE OCEOH OGFS4 Ed LENE E TEETH EES FOOSE HEOGe (F048 FhRad babes Heese een f BSeas 8388 ce
SEDULSEEEaSSS eee tttes ett tes PHESSS SESE CaST SESS Sess eget esse rere
Seeleeesinaees Sane bedesbesks heees ldeed (nota dened bokes haees eel \eeeed bade be
PEs RTE NE eT KE WS CSE ES POT Ee Ore es Newey Vern ENTS FTP es Fre eee) Ta Tee Fee es oe
piosetseristecentitissrstierstrereiiettenresii tee! rhistetherressepeter tt hieted
Sbes hehe heS25 7 lone Feber POEs OSES HdeGe shoe REES4 Fi bes Redes beet! bUSSe Lbdes ba
SETH RSET LIST 2 SES LTITT COTES PEST HSSSS { Noes teats ieee rete tent tees
Oeel SOHAL heed U [NRG teees bees hosed LEROL |) bb00 POOad Abbas Reel ESRS based hebea SS
STBsCeHNd CETEST LHOE eae ET WR TET VETERE tare wrets eeererses- — _yenest rete: ee
SESs TEETH ABET. CERSSSEES EESES 18844 -eaeS SESR6 CRESS SEE SS ,, x SEER) BOSS SEES Oe
S564 PEESG EN- | - rhe EESes bhEes been’ “L242 sabes PeHaH bebe bd. <“ 2224 pened Stee ee
Sed 60d FR2>, — HOS F0bRt HEEES 60002 Px>- 4hDS POESH $4086 KETEE om seeds Peed ee
5004 65004 GUERT > BOS SSSSt PESSS ASSES PSST! C254 FEG45 15500 RSeabeSTe bases BEESs te
TITITIT Te listiiitiisiiieesl itl irri iio ti iit iasti te itty

Send FS RCKNeeee Gees seees peess teces liver, (uses seas tenes seuss rey, \ Sseeg Feees sx
SFSU SESH LESTE DIGEST ESTES UETES FSSESHSSEe HESS FNESS FEE SS ESTES ESL ) PETES FEES Fe
Prerrsserrreer rari irecess assert rere Temes rir trrscsr ret iers steer ttt Tet
2550 FS530 be2ae b (S22 eases POSSe Nessa esas BSSs eels 2520 2SSe cSas | ESSS4 SSS ES oe
SSS! PUESY CVERN! PERS ON ETS PETET PSSST SRST SESe FEETS FTTET NESEY SERS SSree reees oe
Soot FSbSs BSS: } Hobs Fotos Poses tSSes 1bShe Shoe bbhad bes) Feses bone Feeds bises be
SEsh SEOs Coes) 208 Foss PESES S54 lESeH (Hees FEES 24528 R2SE5 SRS [AP hes LEE SS Oe
SOS6 NSSSH PGSEd (ROMS COT POSES Nenes ideen “Hass Bhd habes kanes etal. Steet bbeesee
Sees OSES bees A, Ube babes Stee beets Newbee h VE ba thoes Nebes Renee heekh, Dest eeena he
RESs PT ESY REET) Nae y Te ees PETES THES NREL SE wees SERS RRS RE SEEN FSET ewes te
soos bead saeed i Land eeess HESS Ou bea hase) L880 based sHeRs EESSe beHEN (weed HGSS se
SESS RSSSa FSSS4 4 (S58 SSSs beees he sss Hsees | Vise beead thoes beess beaty pees Reged ts
O5e8 booed baSS4) oad boee8 FbSes has lepak) (Ca RENO 1USSk Lewes egnde /kEa4 tndee be
Sees seent bebe) (aah etet Peeee £0085 2- - .eSes Sheed Sabet AAA. teees these ta
Tetltset tiem itl istelitsel itt eteseetestiiitt lites t rtebatattpes bit ietts
Sees heeeH edi  -teet beset hens HOGSs ~~" .nbee Be bad boats bas ~s1 ga bed BEGES Oe
SSS4 RSPSRRESSY y SSS 55555 FESS PETES Sowers ESS EERSTE FSESE RSSST AGTH FESS ARTES OD
SUSU SS ESA BSS > jase Faees PESes essa Heaee? 484 FESS seeee Hees presse [pSss eeseses
Shed cSEbe Hoods Adee bases besks leeds head? -UGSe thdae b3$04 USS bbue Chee bee Se
Tetlistiliterthttitestedasestieteltetidaratiastttttesttietiitiahiesr di thet
OTILESTUP Perret restedseereretereyiiretigeeeresesni rer retia ayer tier ts
SSS! PSSST esse | iSes saees Poses toses leees| Kees besed sues seuss sere ‘8ees Feaes Fa
2955 SSSA NESTE | Seas C SESS EE SES SESS HESS | F295 BESES EFS REESS SERS? (S554 FREES Se
Sond erbbd ered | (oes deees beers deze|es lense bies beens seers keazdeersé S444 bbder sd
TTSTIIITILI LITLE LLL ELL iLici Elia tise tlie
SED] boebd pases aes tetas eaes bossa leaeds eee beaad taees saaes ctetd . vees boaes be
S558 FERAU HE GEd OOEd keees ETE NTSE4 eens FOE POES4 ANETS REESE EERE eed NOSES be
bee bee ed NOOK hbNs 6b Ss CRRbs 14008 dood) Od bh bed Obed bee eek eed
Cone eR eH Peres) Nowe Tees Petes PETES eewe s Fed Peaes E=P ES Henne weed | HEE Reees om
5s) boned beeas | Vane dbibs hoses Phaea Leees § bas bodes ovede Lanes Beek) | boas Rage ts
Goat Denes Beeay ) Jane Ced0e BETES Loses NESE- - /v RG FOESS 84Oes HODES RES=- | Legs RRaSS oe
SSS) FEESH Ha ToL “NES DES EESES SSSte> coche) eS RSESEEEC case 20° IEE
Sock hosed star - be. debt eeeesdagba> Sassen floes sees serr linens he saceate
Sree cress cen eee. ~4 es eeees ceses >) ees 22s peres ceeey Vee, S53 e2 Ss
SES eesy resis c ks” 94 peses reses bbws; set 1999 tease ened FSer hE’. caees Te
Sees Sere see. Sate ee seeeS SSSSS te Sc EeGSS SESSE SEES I: ed Geeee Oe
SSSG SESH PGTAS OPES Sas 95 SSSES 59054 NSEN MEDRE SES2.4 90555 53555 SEY’ 4 CESSES EES ES SS
SSS) SESH OS6ES TRESS SSs PESES USES ESM, Wades BEUSe se5Rs Feees ESLA £eess Dees oe
PELs TT HEH Pete REPS TeTEt heres Press heer! terre Peres trees rreer evel! eerrs tries oe
SESE CLEST LSEST LES STET LESES TSTT STA LSLSE CELTS SESE EIST ESSE | PSSe3 2389 ts
SOSEREEEHHRESH (POSE COE EE DOES NNOSE HEE FORTE PORES SOs FOdeE eee | aees Fides oe
FPSI PSST PSSST [TERS ESTEE RP Ses IeeTT tas! Conte Fees 8 FeRes FSees Pees | Ferss FS Tes FF
Sool pened tases Anne eset Peses 1e0ns ieee) Peaen BESSE SSeS RASS ESET PSEEs Sees be
SES e CSET CNET EES FET ES PESES FET TENS>— oH PET FETT PTET E ROT EE Sef ESET Ese es te
eehsstpiseentiiittestedissaLicaePtesibaestddaethitespiteapeessitessditeated
ebed eter TFC s Rabat ewees betes 02! <3 i eoed OhUSe RON F4ETE HORSY TAR bE bOSEs HbGwe +4
SES4 TEMS x RHE HS Se FSS ST hb SEs bS2—- Sass sess PENSE Fetes bese, “Hed besad tedes te
S500 CSET ra Ta $5550 5554 DOSES had ba . “Had SUSAR bSGS4 SUES ROSSALY ths bE DEESE Oe
tettitititetiisttestsiseiitietihimctidisttitistittstiethidess titrate
O04 bSROH Hoek TEE PRE ESOS] FOONH OOSEE HED. <3 3404s RENEE NEES BASSE FON ¢ RE eed Feb aa Se
bes FERAG Rete ~ Sod Reeth EERE wee. = E854 Lakes eeRA bee) “+204 beens ee
Sees S008 $8088 DESES peewee ~~ Os 10008 REESE ewes ——— 9 SE eee — ol
sect beerleeenge- — —e | —
FEST SSS eT AFeT TOTS PDTES LU SeR OER PRTEd Posen SeESE FETE ENES | PeTsstteee?

SSSHRSESA NESTA (POSSESSES ESSE S FSSS5 NESE) NUS SS RENTS F4SSS FEES CSTs (FSESS ESE SS Fm
setpeserbrtedeerittcsestasiettiteptiweprtcedearrey 555 60855 522 1 hSSS4 55889 a
SEERS bad pasel yagegtsess posed Naess ieee, reese Pohaa sdete Regan een. t pases ERees Ss
Sass SSSS5 8 2e50 }SSs oses Doses LeS22 SSE) poses RES25 32552 52525 Sees | SSS SSSes se
TTTTIITIT IT Lil iillclecliellilel LLU ULL LLL iriilelil ete
sidicsostesetutterestalissottocstisrmtestitsertsssotriotiontiissecssrrttey
SESE Cees teed [2h8s Sates Fests ipees ices) Woors esses betes nenss Fens | bones reces ts
CESARE OOH RG bes |A4OE Fee ht OSes NG ee HtSe) PO bOe PORTE HOERS Fe eSS EHH | Cheed HHOeS ES
Sees CSSSN SESH [SERS CREED Tees HESS OFS> NSREN PESTS SETS RETEST L4 Ss ESE SA TSAR Te
RESe SSE ET PH 4g REST CEES ROSES HES wa CR RSE PEESS BU ESE RESTS ces PeeEt reeEs te
Sead paend <f44 head eaeel Whbea bbe «i pped sane Dbbad 65604 00n2) Cones booed Dhaea oe
SEEi ESET AOS ESSE LSTES ReETS Ess SSEte SESE SESa EST SESE Cyd betas rgses te
Hetisterreuceritrepesisitsesitoocpectttireriitteiticettteiee tics rehi tists
Sane ceeen ses) snbee tases seee)s Sheen fib ‘ed caeee Pena ds boees ROeeE toe ve OSes PSSES te
SESE ESEST Sah. 78S ELSES RESET LTT TSE sc PTE LETTS LSSET BSILT EEN tad STR Is
S338 (S880 fee. oo SSESs REE LSE EE SSS EESTI USSSa SSIS E Feeds asd Seaas le
Oss beata taeas Conn? See ——— 40008 68008 rer: --——_ 14 8688S PGs --——_ 8
Ee TT ————
SEee SS005 USK! Eas SESH PeSen 15504 KTA= DOSTA PEGE EEE DSSS Sor. | BEESG bode ce
SPST RSET FREED AG SS PETES OP SET ee TE tees Trees fh eee be res feetl eres | feees Rees ee
pstisssiitieimrrttestotisseeitisiistipsetstssettessitretieteitisssi trite:
SOSH SSSA RSS NGOS SESE RESES PSSST HESS, 1SSS5 19544 54955 FSE89 FS b VN FSSSS ESSE S ES
SESi SSAA ESTES (FEET OTST PETES FSSSE SEL) (aSse PEE Ss 23508 2SESs TEL); Peees hESEs SS
BESs SS2ns ness dant seeee heSES Hoses heae! bases pease 8SES2 EsEsseeas | beens cesEs ES
Tetbetititteteititbterelittstieeiietikitathisttbiieetitetierieretitiete
TST TTTISI CELL ISEAEIOISOSOET OSS LOLI ELISSEIOCERESOLEL Csi eteeiesecel lees.
Sees Pees NEA) [Ndws Reet heee beeed GOETE MHESs PE Had SObes FO4es a>) lbeeed thdes oe
2555 FEES HAKs! NOGs Reees bESEs ASGF6 S20 S88 CEESs FSESs ERSSEES -ehebes bEGes te
eke bbs OH os 2hbn sk dks ehh S OR ol bobs bhbSd OSES okey Sob bees Ubded as
StetbesstPeactbiiistissebissstisteacrittitsstssetpiistitietteriiiesetdetiets:
eons RSESH Os TA Sees ERbSG ESES FESS) ~CN) SNESS PORad OSS ROSSI. Le re Sees Faees CR
S558 FS 540 NEDO hOEGs bag bs bE SOs FS Sed Sed 815O8 BOR as FEE 84 Fe eee LN vd bOe84 bEGSS Ox
SESE DS OeH ESED NOSSO ERs OSes Meare HED Se Ob nes FOES Hobs Pewee ES. “Pa heres HHtes te
peel besed basa shed bases bones Jbas4 ees sabes Gebade babes hea ees <ibeed eae ee
OSs FRESH SOEs re and EER hee = aes 2S ee Pes = ot oe
SELL CTESd ears 2 = Ea SERS Sas ee 0 Eh vad cee — rt
SESE bee baees ns ees ENR EE HET Ce eT ee |
OOS4 ESSE HN ASSH | VERSE ETES OE SSS SEO ENSSED LOFTS PERSE NESS SHEE CSE. V POE RT HH dee Ow
ees ESSA deeas | lees bodbt DOSES Feeds NEbes| BARS CORSA SAGES EEBSA ERD UROEa Kheee om
SES) eSeey twews - pSee eee eT Poses Petes ieser poets Cn Kay Peete reteN er (2 Peay? enews oe
SUSE FEES RSeed. Gees SVCUTES VESTA SSEh ES NE resp pay
S508 bObSE hOSSE | HORE Ties bbSeS LbSes HeeRs (Shy b/ 944 b4eed beeel box; h bes < (aa8a be
SOSH PSSST NSSST | PFET S Lhe PSSES Feees NESTE Kone: 04948 54888 88689 FSF! TPehe- ltees re
SECU PSess Neeed! BEES des PSSSS Nwaee NEAR (Sau S420 4eSes REESE RSE) LEAK | eeeEE Re
SOR e TEE Cre ee EEE T Peers TAT es Were) pees Prete Te Eee ete e ory nc ees Petes ee
Sesh ceees hagan| Kies uses hoses tases ituee( [553 peaassuses neces sen 5 bares teges ss
sealesstieseciettahsatsddesetessl betta etsaaseteetessteetteaudesethertetes
SESTPHideseey LOQls retest ChStd Este sete e Ube tesad ees eeted eee. i teeed tttests
S2elbeehd bass Sahee beset beebs haaed loebas Lbs heaaa 14008 eRn4 bedi 1 booed beeen ee
ELI ISLET LEELA ULES EERESECEED LESTE NSEETS CEREREDSS SESE LERSLESES [EERE LESER LE
sstssetissetlinvettesssdde: atsssirste te aaseeettestrittisttatesstistrets,
Sond beebd Peed Chaas teeet heeks AGEs UFREE) hOS8 PON d 14004 Reeee RSAU | 2S04 BOdeS Ce
Sho4 PSSST HAES) ~~ SS OGSEs HERES Nd beg S>——~ AGS REESE 19820 FSSSS RKUS Pees FOeEa ee
ooed Obed ba See Cte PSE eSEe Ha sen heed Reed dees Ceeed Ere Seeae neeee ae
SEEd Pers rwesy PMeee = 4 reese Seed, —~eeeers PERS UeSESU ESE IPs Sees DEETE re
eed peead heed -~a reset peeee eee Pre. Ses bead $4829 Seeee co, lbeeed hans ot
SETE ESEST Petes SHES reese CESSES SSE SST | TITS EEETT EST LLSSE Se 1 Reese tes ie
SOs REESHEGSAL. “See beSSs PETES HAKSs HdEad) bee4 bene bas heesherr 4teeed thease
SESS CSESN £SSS5 NW ASE SSSR PSSES ESSE LESS | BSS5 PSEA FSESS SSS OS Ub bSSST ESE EE SE
SEE] EEESY PeTTs | SERS IT EES beers resgy peege! qrrs beesy peesy ieeey pee, y caged cease ye
SPO] Obbed NOSad | bees seses h OE bs beeed leeee| te ebnad iieellieeloey [ Paoes eden cs
SESECEESTCSSSS ORES LSTET ESTs NESS NSESS, NESECEESS GEESE ESSE CS E3223 1232382
Sesh Pease STs FES Sted Poses Hoses HSSES, PETE CRESS Hab Ss babes bee! : bSted F383 te
SSSACSRSUCTHSS URES SOSSS USSEE FESSEEESEd USS S540 CS ESE RESEE Se ESees BEEEE he
TTITNIIL LLL LLL LULL LLL LLL Lie,
rtetissetisisnde bi etessoisesettstiiitetterstisspiticsni tet ised eippeehit tenes
SESH SES CATH HOS STEHT ESTES FSSES NESSES PTS PORTH FSESs ETESS PETE PETES TRE wT Ce
SESH SSSTH OS4s) Sees eeees ESSes Gases Stee F ete Peess ESESs CSSts Senk, bOSES THORS OH
O6S5 645560 FS84\ 64008 10484 005545 645444 NOSES | L055 654d beSSERSEEE ESOS £4444 UEESE LE
SET? press cscs (ases races poses pease srers) Sees cess sy ees rsssrcsee resss cesses re
salt beead cate, Gnassested specs lease paana rstasserrtisoisretisremrrsrnitr ite:
Seed OPAOH bebe) = SOEHd Rees FEET -— ho Rs RE O4H F4SO4 FOOSE OOEL. “2O04 Fed me be
SOed bnF4 RASas EES) vr. AU eke NES FESES FAR SS EOS beeed Labeda ~~ (enaa hedee ee
S551 65504 15504 59>" > Cp boos USSD “Sess bSbas 55555 ESSEC i PedSa bees ce
Sood FOO HERA “HERE ETESST HOES NESTS Eber Hees FORSs C20ee ReSeE ESTE Peees HHaes ow
Sood stead balay (hassssees hOSss beaea libaad. Nees ceed saeee haasdnany |pases beans se
S554 PSSA FSS) FSS FSSET REESE 15555 NESET (HOSS FESS F4SSS FSSSE ETT 5 ESSSS FEES FS
S050 FSS Y ROT) ANS PFSSE PUSES 1 SSS SSG4 UES8 FEES s AS ees PESSs ETL" pened NEES Fe
COCR ESE4A OOSCA FEES FOSSE HESES 1ESO4NSTES BSS4 POSSE 14004 ROSZE EES? 1 ESOG5 FEGEE ES
Coes SSO NSE ARES FOFSE NOSES FREES SEES SFF4 FEESH FORTE HERE PERS | beens Seeed Fe
Seed Pee et bases Sees be ses bhees beese Heeee (aren Beaed beeee nebeueney | pened eaane be
SESdRSESH RSse4 bes sress bhsee tessa etes nese bbo39 pases cases esd (bees tides ea
SESE SESH ESE GF FOO s OSSEs Rees UES EAHEAES UOSe PO Oa4 £4008 Ceees Peed haees ibbas be
O5s5 bbb) 60555 hbSs hobs SERS Ube de USDSE bbd) COS od 12550 bd ees bes | beeed bbdee de
FETs CTT TY ESER The Cee TPT ES PPT ETN ESTe VT Te Pena Ferre See ee rere. Peres Peres re
PSS5 PSRAN ESE Y (LOWES ESTED pees Phees iESOr) (60d BOOSH Fe bSs Ne Ses PEHs) Panes hagEa be
PTSTITIVUICISRR TC TEe cess eser cee ETI eereees err seees Crteer rue rterrr titre
TEST STERN TTee Feet satel reeee toeee hares £078 Peeed eres rsete ress] fare theet ee
sees eee been! Sheba teeee hesektasisliened #665 00044 0000s n2ess beet] babes bebe ba
PESe CST Se CSTD LARGE PETES PETES PETER ESSeS SETS SEE TS SEESy SETHE CSET) ESTES EE Ses ee
SESs pees Fseed Stas Crees phass <— _—. sabes bogey test foes ESEe. Yones nages es
ones beens babes NERSTN ji eheee Lae. 18SERS sabes Pebed b4Ebs Ones es —-Seee HHOed oe
Seed OS EEH FER HK 5a POE Be as —_ -“ 50008 FOOSE O4OSS FEEREL  *= FO884 FR dO e Oe
Bees beehk RBaan cSRSE ARG et PUSS Reel RSREe RASA DENSE OSG Se ROSSA REET FOOSS RhGeA ee
SEat PSaes tees ews Cases PETES feeet Seer ese peEes BESS CESAR esy PSSST teees ee
SESS FFERHNRSSES BES FOEE4 FEES FEO EE NSESe [HOSS REUSS FOESS BESET FEN 4 FOOS4 HESS Se
CSO EEK RASEE Hwee eeeet Peehe LASEENSOOT HOSe ReneH Dee Reees Hee. i beeed thaws ee
S5SH FSSA NSSST (TESS TESST PSSST NESSES NESEY NESE FEESE 14SSs SSees FSuh  ESSSS EHESS ES
SESE 5550 USSSA SSS ORAS PESSS 1SSES SASS (USES BEES SE 10555 SSSSE SEE |FSSRS FUSES ES
SOOe TE Ee URES [Ree RTASS Peres ISTES Ne eet SESS SRN TE teen ESSE SSeS | eneet tetes ee
Sees SSSSH FSEEG FSSH 98 PETES FSESS HESS [OST F US SSPES AANSS FSET | PES |] Fa ees ez
Sool seed tases ‘aes "(189 beses teses tease ira lies ttees teses toes |ben _ lates te
rhed Steed tee? sted sed etees fetes tetes Nae. sted tees eesti teen (reso cetedes
Zend banal baee’ dddee> je4 bboes beoee beeens brs - 56nd dees ceeekbesa kasd 1225412
Boss peney puss ( yeeas’ \se rpees Lewes reese y (vey res seees seeeT peer pes, loss be
She) Peres Perm enees | ee heees leone htseey irr ise9 sews freee ever) Pred | loees ee
pees ceeel tat.) os tates beees teses Lea), oan beees sees Geese iC | eee Coens oo
Teer eT evr Les Pica eeeeisclerrerel is  ERlt Vie errriesrt reli sina terrr tier
ebed eaand keer - 7 £28 beens beens deeded PaSs4 ” s25s beens odes Reeek Ooes | 4545 Beans oe
seen new ToT) PSURs TOSSs ERSES UEETE Tan eS ee Boe d FteeT UEEET Peees EH 1 eeeee ee
Seed be. ‘= LhSad ledee O6sa4 bbees bak . —eSEs £5506 FEES4 40 POE OO4EE BEF - ae ed Re Fe
Lesheted Pree eens beteslstseLittetiateapessdsaethhtssditetbecatesesbenbebed
Shee Neo eH PUT RE FT US Cee hs Petes Neeee teete SOBER SSS SSSSa der eee -
Sect beeen bseea > beatetet besee beahs HOR> (2554 bana e Robes BAbaR oes (theses Coane be
SOC CS HAH ERSET A NCOs CRS et POSES FEST Se. CSET REESE FTESE RESEY Pel Ws Ee ees re ees Oe
SO PONNG ROOGG kh. WEES Shes NOEs Feed NERS, LHS POET E 06006 ReSeE hed 1d bOees Hhewe ee
SoS! Pees bases £) PSs Fetes beSes tease Heese 183s besad sabes Foose bs 3 baess HAa8s Fa
Seek Obed FOSS4 i bee betes betes LhOSs Geen OEF8 bEb44 FS bes beeet hed 2 hetes Hndee ee
SOS DSSS POSES! PVs ESSSs ESSE PECSENSSOE (S604 FOCOH PEST HORSE DSS Wheeet Heeee TE
Sess rsees reed 0) Bas press peoss roses esegy jorge cptss syed tesey can) [cores coves ts
CETL EF ETY HOSEA © C84 CSTE PEERS OMSK EROOd LeUet ERE a deere peteeeel! hhoeet thaeees
Reed FSP eH FASR Th TE SObes PORES ESTES OST K. S488 REELS AG ORS RR OSe Ese (5 hens sh Ra we oz
Seed ES EEN ERSTR OED DDETTETERTET CF OTENS ROG s TPO RPEN NESSES Hemet Eh (SS Peres Chee Er
OSS4 OSS S4 OBS44 OO) £46 B4S4 COSES FOOSE NOSES S USS HOES 8444 BOSSE OSE 4 OOSS4 COSSEEL
SEst recey sevey co cs reese press seezy neeges (rye Cpres reper eses ree) 9 rare sores ro
soak beeed natednn \Oteesea phase les UPESTTY ESTE EERSTE St sesy beh! Okage theeaee
S31 boted Esau + ln8 peed) bOS0s SSes bets” 2906 FB Edt fobed 6583 bal & rs2ed pened Fe
S0ed bee e- ~ __. wxGes bebed BOSS bas ooo ERODE SEES SEE DSSS rath hedeass
eed bea” reSEe BUSES oss bebe bd 85 bd oboe odo Ss bases ae” ed bebe ee
Seeq cers — CRS SOSSt PETES $54 __ EPS PEESS OPEES ESSES EU — BESET PHeES ee
S224 ceed FESKG Ty pes coeet betes Heaes LESRO! 2906 Peete eeees ceses vd]! 5 reeset betes Fe
5555 §55404 NOSS4 bps b5eS6 FESES 154664 SSC (5556 F5544 55558 6546546048) +) 65508 £5486 F6
SESE PLETT LSTST A VES ESTES ESET HSSTT SS. <TETSS EENSS ETEST see Cs, 3) Lees TEs ts
Dest hebdd OSAMA. ONG hE Ss PECES NOGSd bod 6hS04 FRNEK Mdeed ROO AS. VA booed DER Oe be
RES SOSH POTTY FREE TET ES Peeee TSeTT HERES (ETE OPeee TERE ST Hee Hes I Peret TP Tes Te
3064 bEOal Raeae Cl CS tr eke ROSES IRATE NREes (Re re breed b2eke RROEE hOe NReTSs Rhaed te
PISTITISTITISIUT MIs eles il eriesecetretsi cel i is) weitere
SEC ET EEN UU ERSE! Pet ewe ee FETE S Ree ee HERTS (F088 ROUTH FOSS FREES FED Sheree HRewe ee
Sess hee eH ba bed ht PAS Seted POSES FOSeS NSeee (SESS POSH FSSSS beben eee Ababed Hhbes ee
Ses PSST PESTS FA Se FSEET POSES PETES I PSSe “HOST PERTH ES Eee ESETE FE! (9 PeSes NERS ee
FSSs SSS Y CSESY NS) NF SSTET ROSES FHSES SSTG 2 LES FESSS FTESS ETHSY PEK) PSES4 UETES Fe
SEPA EE EE RO SOT HES FeO ET FREES ENO Ee HE REET) Ot PORTE FFP eE HOH PE Pee a Reees HHaee Fe
SESH ESE SY OS GSY EE/ FSSSTEL REESE SSSESHSSETE (EPS CRESN SESS SSSES EST, PESESS URGES ES
Sook ee bed based UE ha oeses bOSSS BwSSs SEES Y [Ube Sodas bSEEs bases neh! Lbeses bbaES EE
SESy PFET KSSSG FG “Pe PETES PETES ESET PeSe Ns 1459 PESS9 IT ESS ESS Sy SE! Y ESSES ESE HE te
See) feess bas-" igs caees beses reece $S2F~ —s9es £0885 yess F282) Fee) “AK8 B87 83 Fe
SESb ROK? . wet EE4E FOS Et OSES NEES" ~" _,< Se eed BONSS 14SS) FOees Otel yo Th hha s he
seed bea © CEL SS aU ae ee ees beeen ta) — "Ries Pebe4 Heads bees REREE EET CtTEd Beane Fe
Seek beabe eee Vee bSSSS DEES beoan ee SASK DREAD 6bSSS RRS REY LUSed PERERA LS
Cel PETS ewes Af PET PS ERT PETES Nees ease) SOF" FRETS Eres KwwTe reT ) CESS ORE ws Oe
piscissstisterterticctatsstetttrelitremtesssiiertiissitisiiersaetttsctitrets)
eel beeed naeed ) (084 b0¢08 Peeks Lbaes lies) 16200 PEbed Loess bowed FS) $4 b0ee8 Ludee ta
Sosa bssed dessa b. pes roses bese dessa savy Wages teass sates pease egy. \y bssss tease te
SECU USRAAUNSST El UEC SSSEEPESES NSSS4 SG6U (AESR ROUSE SSESS SOESRESL) 4s ORSES BRS E Le
SESs Te wey eee ts wer ress eres yew es peer eee reese reece reeves, a eeestrrreses
SESS SSSSUNAESH HY) BOSE EAES RESES F588 8 eee S ese Specs tooes 6255s Sen! § egees sees ce
SPSS OSGAH ARES OC LASER GOd PHEES IESES HRSSE SRE Rhee Rees KEEES OSL) 3 SSEt Rees em
PISTIIIITIIICC CEM TIS LSUI AIST IS EN Tris es iil ict i itis ei ies ir
OSs S004 BSSS8 Ut FE OOS SE PE EES FGSSSNGESS VATA REESE SSESS ESTOS EST HUSSES EESES OS
SOO 1 FSU NE FOSS PKS Ie PSCRE ROSES INSEE FEET C, TFN FENG SE 8888s VEEEE DOF UV pense FHS ea Fe
S5St PSSST FSSST HE? Le Fees ESET FSSSs ESSE S FSS FSES Ss FE SSs FSEES PSC) V PSSSs FFG SS Fe
SPST SES Y FUSES EH SE SEPTS POSES PFSSS FEES S 849 F846 85Ses FaSes ESL! J Feees HEE es oe
rteitetetietettrareteersdirredtecetbererirredaa eet: Siitrstistietisssnatiets,
35n8 Gobed eases fH [ad baad PeSes $2222 hess > obs bEkae obese 2208 222) \ ovens bbbes oe
TTT: na CERES PESTS PPS ES POSES USK | Lees PPE Te eres Cee eRETe ~ —< eeees oe
brodirtgerererpiiietesreiy eset tetaseormrteleeise bi hiiestt rit ietrstpamhye hit hes
lah aay soes Soebs PESTS RES=s 54, ~cee* Kegad SESS RSEE FEe. —P. jhesaee
eh8s thes) FSEar py Loge tbs poets haa petty fey oes $24 beens 6257 (ak thane be
Sees neces sees hoe et peses imesdteeds re _ Shed beds bees Sea) Fees sense
BEE er ren oo ORE BREESE EERE eee pee CRESS OO ETT BEER | wees mn 3 ESSE SE ESS ES TT
Seed (fad based sheuteneesnpen Saga igeaa snags cegga ited ostisiisissstei tiie
S555 1 OSd BS 5E HOHE S ESE) BO EEN POSES P48 C4055 F 0644 5456 | 65588 FG Hd hoes FRbeS Ce
Seat hheet Ba t4s mdad Foeet Heeed boone heans sees RO hae Hts | Seeet Hee hd haead Chews te
$5581 tess ceed Shee ae Bdsd baell ceens cheeses bores bee | Gaeed ehebe bOs2s 25253 88
A
The Hectrocardiogram 109
ve cane T. rs rere en ee feds wes fog ee) feee oe veseeefoe ope tn inh tent os ees ee
Sfe = =Seeee = =— sees Sea
Bbe ieee eee SS sees SSeS eee
Philpires if SILIDTS nS aed) a oe a eaeen peege seeee fries bees oe on ae a
pieepesss waite: pa pare pmane matin paperanes iestaenss Weiienenas Remneperes mnneaeeied i arts pe seurany " pecs ewees newer pe eee: saan an we
Lo piesbipicibeserpe dp ouuibomipiers ind cere sie seuee ayes kanes seeweueved Soon See
Twa faaee ? gene pa is pas qeens gecee necesmeese! — {f= 4 pep on EnGereE oF Sraraney CDEDETY ,
pet pe eas dee Ow ee arene eoeierend: Sreearines ppeneretes apes iran WOreetn BarEren,| . ae rare eae — A eee
eg a
wr ee a te Ia ets Songs Gnnea TEnUs SORES RWNES DnSan ESTES HERES Same Se eee ee —
rare Senay serene we se ereres ne St ——<—— -

Seb woSee See o a sae Tes Sees ===
eae epeces Hy eee Weacee Geers wrerstany Beni tooet cases stee wenay H pecs ives feeteteernen pre paeeare are ——-
— PEEaaE Sees Seay ;onue Sagem payas seansunguy suns sawes! Sous sous Fpgetestessrsaa opeplbosts =< we
pee geGee sees 2 === ==22= = a=
pS es es a eee
Sees coe Seer eer as SOe note Eierer erat mentenee ss Seenenmees 4 oe Sree abe. htt tether FP onnees aera =
an Serra Ne Perea enenanes ve en Sees re Sere eeeedon cone fy pcos cased trans oot ecasaestaneS? Lo a ane eeeeeien Sane
preoene pean ~ ee. cena fp teecace Peabo poem bt he feed te are
SS ee
nee yee eres . ak oeres WeOENeNES SENET — eee ee ene eerie — fot are Snare Eanes EneneT — .
1 ESE Ves BS BESS eee ee
tebe ee bie eb dee federal nibtbass eentiistl Gikikine cases cee, Dame Gees pomeeas aeael eeedeoe paren es ane ae LASS Sey
BSS 222222 See S=== === ==s=—ae
papenents ieee: MOIDANES Set = = ceeren GUE pareneee prevenaben innirs ae mews borat ate }——f _ SN eS eee meee
Ge au Ee eee eee See SSS Sass SeeS
paar Coenen ene. ee ee ~~ —— aan i Sonne SEs Senas ovens eenea ores pene anne: I
eee eeres GT coos Coral bot meet one SES ESE SSS Spey =
oe eee ee Seas SSeS Se
are! enna 4 a oo coeeseoee  wewseeee arene jouune eee apeaE Sancpnees Sneeane SmnIEONS HN
tebe ary en ere eewer egensewene! [ope errata | es OS. SS ap
gig 22 SSeS See SSS SSeS SSS Sa
PSG se0sSen= 25 S==SS======S2=
nae aaa 4 UES, sees neces Seseuaneen! seus suena penCarel GUUDOAENEN COEDENTET cotee maces woe =< aves eae
re ne anes S wit POSee peuws Pee eens pe Serene tt — 2 op ed o- Ee UP 3 peenennts Ieee
weaaobeaae sy ae ote Pe ee epee ee pares errs cakenr preps eee ee teas eterets meen Ens En EE oy es ene wera we
Se Eee Sa =
Se ss ee
SU UL Ss wom Seceares Meemenenes NCnEENES | SL mena SUPURONNES SAO ee ae aoe co —
da ace Farevenel Shaiavera: eevararen Ieararsees peerarere: musenenes lnGreranes Spupiiaves mvqsesepes Grentpens 2. oie Poe detenoe bisa spon ce wee —
eS eee ee Se oa aa See Sees Se
BGb 2 fae SSeS SaaS SS Saas a=
ewe pee ‘ome cnsrenen eee earas Garenanes Gras peat Bee ee Pe ee oF ed eles ereree reread erase eee aes 2 aie coe ees
sufi SEES | Soop S| pea oe eer eee ee
Pee EGS e eee 2s 22S SEES Scea=
ee ef ee ee ee
gop Eee SSS oS SSae SEs === eee
Be: S28 Ses 2s2=s2== se == Sea
— <= —= ape De Shoo See ws — we
tee be . br —. ate pe He earreres oleae bee are Pees re ts tren
ae | pened j-——+ |
re Perera ee eet peaetes al pen Lan Eeeee Seeen gegen se — arenes Rees Be pate taf sen. ——| 3 --| ane Pt
Bee) Se oe See SSS SS2e See Sa a=
SEER pee eee
pubes Ganenene SESS nevada NS NOE ee EDN = t——{-— =| fp -= = =| aoe eneneres Eeeebenel ees entree Genie = -—
Saou GE See! sea a=S==eS2==r-===
Soe. f= Sa= See 2==S== SS == SS
Se Sere Ee ee EE
eet Pea : Pepapne me arene srerepute ame Pare ed oh a peerend
SSE SEES +S orice —=
Bus 2525S Se = s==esS===r==
Sau: Soe See Sas 2 S=S==sS = SSS
fern era ewes eereree weer com uae rnes sae pa aan CTR ce as
280) SSeS SS2 Ses == Ses Saas == ae
paete east ental tees eees paw sa hoses Wanres Sage aewee saers EVES E See EC vonpae oe 4 a
eiatets mevasees Mere iies tierra pereneres sare pth ee bo. aa. pane ware =? —-— > oe ett anenen SoeSEDES OUENN eine foe na teens a
Se San sabes raved Getta wee ewes Seats ewes beugs aeewsoseren bepet Geees eesdeah sites oot peckabcoeseeess fees Seres eeeee oe See ——
Cd wer dent — = cea ten alt
22S 2 Seo aS eae aS eS
ba Sees ietenie bet nies fee feng terete be
ane cause ackut saaeecunwa wer pocke poy pte ee et Pies = pgens vases cuewe pares uasecouees =I a
The Hectrocardiogram 111
ae eee eee
ry i tie eye te PE PTE EE
PHU TT TT TTT TT A TT
UT ey yo OT et
SE} awe va
Sel Se Bee
LT tT Tt tty Te eet ee ET TE TT TE TE TT ET TE EEE TET ET
Lt tT tet tee ee ee PP TE TT eT
IT tT tT tT ite ete et eT tT PTT TE TT TE PT PT PT TE ET TE TT ET TT ET TT
Lt tT tet tee ee ee PP TE TT eT
PT itty eee ey TP PE TT TT TT ET ET
ry itty eit ey ee Pe Pe
O0) S08 S08 eee een eere see! seen ee
ak en i eh (| a |
eee) ee ee Cee
eee eee ee ee Eee
aaa ee ee eee
Pitti ttt et ty ty et ey Pe ee
SEP SReeneeee pees eee eee eee seer eee eee
| ee ae | A ON PRS PS Pea Pann) eae
Cigp PT ape Pa I eg
beret ey eee et ey Pee te
HGURE4-36. 12-lead KGG(abnormal). Rhythm: normal sinus. Rate: 62 bpm. Intervals: PR, 0.14; QRS, 0.10;
QE 0.52 (corrected QE 0.53, which is prolonged). Axis: +95 degrees (right axis deviation [RAD]). QRS: pattern
of left posterior fascicular block (LPFB), with small R wave in leads I and aVL, small Q wave in leads II, III,
and aVE and RAD (see Kg. 4-20 for further description of LPFB). The prolonged QT interval in this patient is
the result of antiarrhythmic medication.

Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Stephen R. Pomedli, MD; Lilit Garibyan,
MD; Kyle Low, MD; and Price Kerfoot, MD.
Additional Reading
Goldberger AL, Goldberger ZD, Shvilkin A. Goldberger’s Surawicz B, Childers R, Deal BJ, et al. AHA/ ACC/ HRS recom-
Clinical Electrocardiography: A Simplif ed Approach. 8th ed. mendations for the standardization and interpretation
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013. of the electrocardiogram (Parts I-VI). J Am Coll Cardiol.
O’Keefe JH Jr, Hammill SC, Freed MS, et al. The Complete 2007;49:1109-1135 and 2009;53:976-1011.
Guide to ECGs. 3rd ed. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Thaler MS. The Only EKG Book You’ll Ever Need. 7th ed.
Publishers; 2008. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012.
Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Wagner GS, Strauss DG. Marriott’s Practical
Clinical Practice. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Electrocardiography. 12th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Elsevier; 2008. Williams & Wilkins; 2014.
.
ioe
1a
Atherosclerosis
é
|.
Sarrah Shahawy \ a
Peter Libby
a
Chapter Outline A therosclerosis is the leading cause of mortality and
morbidity in developed nations. Through its major mani-
Vascular Biology of Atherosclerosis festations of myocardial infarction and stroke, it has also become
Normal Arterial Wall ; ,
Atherosclerotic Arterial Wall a major cause of death in the developing world. Gmmonly
Qmplications of Atherosclerosis known as “hardening of the arteries,” atherosclerosis derives
Atherosclerosis Risk Factors its name from the Geek roots athere-, meaning “gruel,” and
Genetics -skleros, meaning “hardness.” Recent evidence has demon-
Traditional RISK FaCtOrs strated that chronic inflammation drives the atherosclerotic
fom ers MNCL process and transduces traditional risk factors (such as hyper-
a cholesterolemia) into altered behavior of vascular wall cells,
contributing to the disease and its thrombotic complications.
The course of atherogenesis can smolder throughout adult-
hood, punctuated by acute cardiovascular events.
describes the normal arterial wall, the pathogenesis of ather-
osclerotic plaque formation, and the complications that lead
to clinical manifestations of the disease. The second section
describes fndings from population studies that have identi-
fed specifc risk factors for atherosclerotic events, thereby
offering opportunities for prevention and treatment.
VASCULAR BIOLOGY OF ATHEROSCLEROSIS
iii
