' J ] a
Normal Cardiac Structure) 9) |
ay
e h > “a
and Function |) ~
Jacob E. Lemieux
Elazer R. Edelman
Gary R. Strichartz <
Leonard S. Lilly 3a
Chapter Outline 7 nowledge of normal structure and function of the heart is
: crucial to understanding diseases that affict the cardiovas-
“ oe and Histology. cular system. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the heart’s
ericardium : :
Surface Anatomy of the Heart basic anatomy, its electrical system, and the cellular and molecular
InternaleStructuresofethesHeart mechanisms of contraction that allow the heart to serve its critical
Impulse-Gonducting System functions.
Cardiac Innervation
Cardiac vessels
Histology of Ventricular CARDIAC ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY
: Myocardial Cells Although the study of cardiac anatomy dates back to ancient
Basie=Heetrophysiolepy times, interest in this field has recently gained momentum.
oi WONT and hannels The application of sophisticated cardiac imaging tech-
Resting Potential niques such as coronary angiography, echocardiography,
Action Potential computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging
ve oe : of cardiac structures. Such information also proves help-
Normal Sequence of Cardiac ful in understanding the pathophysiology of heart disease.
. Depolarization . This section emphasizes the aspects of cardiac anatomy
Excitation- Contraction Coupling that are important to the clinician—that is, the “functional”
Qntractile Proteins in the anatomy
Myocyte
Qilcium-Induced Gilcitum
Release and the Ontractile
Gycle ’ ’ ’ The heart and roots of the great vessels are enclosed by a
Introduction to Cardiac Signaling fibroserous sac called the pericardium (Fig. 1-1). This struc-
ture consists of two layers: a strong outer fibrous layer and
an inner serosal layer. The inner serosal layer adheres to the
2 chapter |

The pericardium is attached to the ster- Superior Aorta
num and the mediastinal portions of the ‘°"* “?Y°\_« —
right and left pleurae. Its many connections ; ee: Pulmonary
to the surrounding structures keep the peri- a artery
cardial sac firmly anchored within the tho- | ry
rax and thereby help to maintain the heart in y ) / .

. woe r Heart within
its normal position. pericardium

Emanating from the pericardium in a <
superior direction are the aorta, the pulmo- inferior
nary artery, and the superior vena cava (see ‘°m’ “av Disphragm
Fig. 1-1). The inferior vena cava projects
through the pericardium inferiorly.

HGURE 1-1. The position of the heart in the chest.
‘Surface Anatomy of the Heart The superior vena cava, aorta, and pulmonary artery
exit superiorly, whereas the inferior vena cava projects
The heart is shaped roughly like a cone and__feriorly.
consists of four muscular chambers. The
right and left ventricles are the main pumping chambers. The less muscular right and left
atria deliver blood to their respective ventricles.

Several terms are used to describe the heart’s surfaces and borders (Fig. 1-2). The apex is
formed by the tip of the left ventricle, which points inferiorly, anteriorly, and to the left. The
base or posterior surface of the heart is formed by the atria, mainly the left, and lies between
the lung hila. The anterior surface of the heart is shaped by the right atrium and ventricle.
Because the left atrium and ventricle lie more posteriorly, they form only a small strip of this
anterior surface. The inferior surface of the heart is formed by both ventricles, primarily the
left. This surface of the heart lies along the diaphragm; hence, it is also referred to as the
diaphragmatic surface.

Observing the chest from an anteroposterior view (as on a chest radiograph; see
Chapter 3), four recognized borders of the heart are apparent. The right border is estab-
lished by the right atrium and is almost in line with the superior and inferior venae cavae.
The inferior border is nearly horizontal and is formed mainly by the right ventricle, with
a slight contribution from the left ventricle near the apex. The left ventricle and a portion
of the left atrium make up the left border of the heart, whereas the superior border is
shaped by both atria. From this description of the surface of the heart emerges two basic
“rules” of normal cardiac anatomy: (1) right-sided structures lie mostly anterior to their
left-sided counterparts and (2) atrial chambers are located mostly to the right of their cor-
responding ventricles.

Internal Structure of the Heart
Four major valves in the normal heart direct blood fow in a forward direction and prevent
backward leakage. The atrioventricular (AV) valves (tricuspid and mitral) separate the atria
and ventricles, whereas the semilunar valves (pulmonic and aortic) separate the ventricles
from the great arteries (Fig. 1-3). All four heart valves are attached to the fibrous cardiac
skeleton, which is composed of dense connective tissue. The cardiac skeleton also serves as
a site of attachment for the ventricular and atrial muscles.

The surface of the heart valves and the interior surface of the chambers are lined by
a single layer of endothelial cells, termed the endocardium. The subendocardial tissue
contains fibroblasts, elastic and collagenous fibers, veins, nerves, and branches of the con-
ducting system and is continuous with the connective tissue of the heart muscle layer, the
myocardium. The myocardium is the thickest layer of the heart and consists of bundles of
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 3
Left common
Brachiocephalic artery carotid artery
Left subclavian
Superior vena cava artery
Ascending aorta Left pulmonary
Right superior artery
pulmonary artery
Right inferior Left pulmonary
ee veins
Pe ii,
Right ? im J 3 Pulmonary trunk
pulmonary veins J
SP 4
& >» ; Left atrial appendage
ty “ eS
‘ ™ ~~ ail
Right atrial =a —
appendage . < Le ft ventricle
Right atrium
Inferior vena cava
Right ventricle
S \g Apex of heart
A Inferior heart border
a
Left common Brachioce phalic
carotid artery artery
Left subclavian
artery Arch of aorta
Left pulmonary
artery
Superior vena cava
Left superior Right pulmonary
pulmonary vein =— a Y artery
Le ft inferior a Right superior
pulmonary vein ' i a | 5 a pulmonary vein
ZS eee | a 4 Right inferior
Le ft atrium 4 | ~ ~. ( ; pulmonary vein
Zag IN. 2 i > Right atrium
a . J 6 ul ee 2
< a J 2
Coronary P AA (kh a —y/, Inferior vena
sulcus af | -f — cava
if “7
Left ie Coronary
ventricle —_ @ SINUS
B Right ventricle Inferior heart border
HGURE1-2. The heart and great vessels. A. The anterior view. B The posterior aspect (or base), as viewed
from the back. (From Moore KL, Dalley AE Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:137—138.)
4 (chapter |
Anterior
) ia N Pulmonic
\ar/ valve
Aortic /
valve = a sal - a
= ; ~ FIGURE 1-3. The four heart valves
‘ is “he Tricuspid viewed from above with atria removed.
<a | 4 Vie valve The f gure depicts the period of
Mitra = 4 =) ventricular fling (diastole) during which
valve 7 Yybgr ia ms. /f the tricuspid and mitral valves are open
af \ aa Ly Annulus and the semilunar valves (pulmonic and
TAINS NEI Hbrosus aortic) are closed. Fach annulus f brosus
aunts rim surrounding the mitral and tricuspid
valves is thicker than those surrounding
the pulmonic and aortic valves; all four
contribute to the heart’s f brous skeleton,
which is composed of dense connective
Posterior tissue.
cardiac muscle cells, the histology of which is described later in the chapter. External to the
myocardium is a layer of connective tissue and adipose tissue through which pass the larger
blood vessels and nerves that supply the heart muscle. The epicardium is the outermost
layer of the heart and is identical to, and just another term for, the visceral pericardium
previously described.
Right Atrium and Ventricle
Opening into the right atrium are the superior and inferior venae cavae and the coronary
sinus (Fig. 1-4). The venae cavae return deoxygenated blood from the systemic veins into the
right atrium, whereas the coronary sinus carries venous return from the coronary arteries.
The interatrial septum forms the posteromedial wall of the right atrium and separates it from
the left atrium. The tricuspid valve is located in the foor of the atrium and opens into the
right ventricle.

The right ventricle (see Fig. 1-4) is roughly triangular in shape, and its superior aspect
forms a cone-shaped outf ow tract, which leads to the pulmonary artery. Although the inner
wall of the outf ow tract is smooth, the rest of the ventricle is covered by a number of irregular
bridges (termed trabeculae carneae) that give the right ventricular wall a spongelike appear-
ance. A large trabecula that crosses the ventricular cavity is called the moderator band. It
carries a component of the right bundle branch of the conducting system to the ventricular
muscle.

The right ventricle contains three papillary muscles, which project into the chamber and
via their thin, stringlike chordae tendineae attach to the edges of the tricuspid valve leaf ets.
The leaf ets, in turn, are attached to the fibrous ring that supports the valve between the right
atrium and ventricle. Contraction of the papillary muscles prior to other regions of the ven-
tricle tightens the chordae tendineae, helping to align and restrain the leaf ets of the tricuspid
valve as they are forced closed. This action prevents blood from regurgitating into the right
atrium during ventricular contraction.

At the apex of the right ventricular outf ow tract is the pulmonic valve, which leads to the
pulmonary artery. This valve consists of three cusps attached to a fibrous ring. During relax-
ation of the ventricle, elastic recoil of the pulmonary arteries forces blood back toward the
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 5
Pulmonary artery
“ >— Pulmonic valve
Superior vena cava —z% 2p) | \ a
¥ lll me” 7 Interventricular septum
Right atrium yea
— a : Moderator
: f — band
__ - SOR Trabeculae
A carneae
Inferior vena cava =~
Coronary sinus SAN
Tricus pid valve Right ventricle Papillary muscles

HGURE1-4. Interior structures of the right atrium and right ventricle. (Modif ed from Goss GM Gay’s
Anatomy. 29th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1973:547.)
heart, distending the valve cusps toward one another. This action closes the pulmonic valve
and prevents regurgitation of blood back into the right ventricle.
Entering the posterior half of the left atrium are the four pulmonary veins (Fig. 1-5). The
wall of the left atrium is about 2 mm thick, being slightly greater than that of the right
atrium. The mitral valve opens into the left ventricle through the inferior wall of the left
atrium.

The cavity of the left ventricle is approximately cone shaped and longer than that of the
right ventricle. In a healthy adult heart, the wall thickness is 9 to 11 mm, roughly three times
that of the right ventricle. The aortic vestibule is a smooth-walled part of the left ventricular
cavity located just inferior to the aortic valve. Inferior to this region, most of the ventricle is
covered by trabeculae carneae, which are finer and more numerous than those in the right
ventricle.

The left ventricular chamber (see Fig. 1-5B) contains two large papillary muscles. These
are larger than their counterparts in the right ventricle, and their chordae tendineae are thicker
but less numerous. The chordae tendineae of each papillary muscle distribute to both leaf ets
of the mitral valve. Similar to the case in the right ventricle, tensing of the chordae tendineae
during left ventricular contraction helps restrain and align the mitral leaf ets, enabling them
to close properly and preventing the backward leakage of blood.

The aortic valve separates the left ventricle from the aorta. Surrounding the aortic valve
opening is a fibrous ring to which is attached the three cusps of the valve. Just above the
right and left aortic valve cusps in the aortic wall are the origins of the right and left coronary
arteries (see Fig. 1-5B).

Interventricular Septum
The interventricular septum is the thick wall between the left and right ventricles. It is com-
posed of a muscular and a membranous part (see Fig. 1-5B). The margins of this septum
can be traced on the surface of the heart by following the anterior and posterior interven-
tricular grooves. Owing to the greater hydrostatic pressure within the left ventricle, the large
6 chapter 1
Pulmonary veins
rd Left atrium
Left atrial me |
appendage | 4
Fibrous ring of ———— i Dp \ \
le ft AV orifice WV ly \ \\
Chordae tendineae j \ ;
| Left ventricle
Papillary muscles f
|
Anterior cusp of mitral valve sy ]
J
To aortic vestibule
‘
A
Orifice of right coronary artery Ascending aorta
y Posterior cusp of aortic valve
/ Orifice of left
Pulmonary artery —_&S coronary artery
A Left cusp of
Right aortic sinus t . SA aortic valve
Right cusp of aortic valve (\s > 4 (=
Interventricular septum, \ , (|
membranous part ) ey 4 vio’
a) RY =
\) HN PN Chordae tendineae
Interventricular \ \ Yi ar
septum, muscular part I) N\ ) / | Anterior cusp of mitral valve
; ; ’ Anterior papillary muscle
Right ventricle
Posterior yo > VA
papillary muscle : A
Trabeculae carneae » ;
B
HGURE 1-5. Interior structures of the left atrium and left ventricle. A. The left atrium and left ventricular (LV) inflow
region. B Interior structures of the LV cavity. (Modif ed from Mbore KL, Dalley AE Agur AMR. Cinically Oriented Anatomy,
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:142—143.)
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 7
muscular portion of the septum bulges toward the right ventricle. The small, oval-shaped
membranous part of the septum is thin and located just inferior to the cusps of the aortic
valve.

To summarize the functional anatomic points presented in this section, the following is a
review of the path of blood f ow: deoxygenated blood is delivered to the heart through the
The impulse-conducting system (Fig. 1-6) consists of specialized cells that initiate the heart-
beat and electrically coordinate contractions of the heart chambers. The sinoatrial (SA) node
is a small mass of specialized cardiac muscle fibers in the wall of the right atrium. It is located
to the right of the superior vena cava entrance and normally initiates the electrical impulse
for contraction. The atrioventricular (AV) node lies beneath the endocardium in the infero-
posterior part of the interatrial septum.

Distal to the AV node is the bundle of His, which perforates the interventricular septum
posteriorly. Within the septum, the bundle of His bifurcates into a compact, cablelike struc-
ture on the right side, known as the right bundle branch, and a broad sheet of fibers that
continues over the left side of the septum, the left bundle branch.

The right bundle branch is thick and deeply buried in the muscle of the interventricular
septum and continues toward the apex. Near the junction of the interventricular septum
and the anterior wall of the right ventricle, the right bundle branch becomes subendocardial

Sinoatrial node
Mitra | va lve
Membranous part of
Coronary sinus IV septum
Bifurcation of bundle
of His
IV septum
Bundle of His Left bundle branch
Right bundle branch Purkinje fibers under
endocardium of papillary
muscle
Moderator band
HGURE1-6. Main components of the cardiac conduction system. This system includes the sinoatrial node,
atrioventricular node, bundle of His, right and left bundle branches, and the Purkinje fbers. The moderator
band carries a large portion of the right bundle. (IV interventricular).
8 chapter 1
and bifurcates. One branch travels across the right ventricular cavity in the moderator band,
whereas the other continues toward the tip of the ventricle. These branches eventually arbo-
rize into a finely divided anastomosing plexus that travels throughout the right ventricle.

Functionally, the left bundle branch is divided into an anterior and a posterior fascicle and
a small branch to the septum. The anterior fascicle runs anteriorly toward the apex, forming a
subendocardial plexus in the area of the anterior papillary muscle. The posterior fascicle trav-
els to the area of the posterior papillary muscle; it then divides into a subendocardial plexus
and spreads to the rest of the left ventricle.

The subendocardial plexuses of both ventricles send distributing Purkinje fibers to the
ventricular muscle. Impulses within the His—Purkinje system are transmitted first to the papil-
lary muscles and then throughout the walls of the ventricles, allowing papillary muscle con-
traction to precede that of the ventricles. This coordination prevents regurgitation of blood.
fow through the AV valves, as discussed earlier.

Cardiac Innervation
The heart is innervated by both parasympathetic and sympathetic afferent and efferent
nerves. Preganglionic sympathetic neurons, with cell bodies located within the upper five
to six thoracic levels of the spinal cord, synapse with second-order neurons in the cervical
sympathetic ganglia. Traveling within the cardiac nerves, these fibers terminate in the heart
and great vessels. Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers originate in the dorsal motor nucleus
of the medulla and pass as branches of the vagus nerve to the heart and great vessels. Here,
the fibers synapse with second-order neurons located in ganglia within these structures. A
rich supply of vagal afferents from the inferior and posterior aspects of the ventricles mediates
important cardiac ref exes, whereas the abundant vagal efferent fibers to the SA and AV nodes
are active in modulating electrical impulse initiation and conduction.

Cardiac Vessels
The cardiac vessels consist of the coronary arteries and veins and the lymphatics. The largest
components of these structures lie within the loose connective tissue in the epicardial fat.

Coronary Arteries
The heart muscle is supplied with oxygen and nutrients by the right and left coronary arter-
ies, which arise from the root of the aorta just above the aortic valve cusps (Fig. 1-7; see also
Fig. 1-5B). After their origin, these vessels pass anteriorly, one on each side of the pulmonary
artery (see Fig. 1-7).

The large left main coronary artery passes between the left atrium and the pulmonary
trunk to reach the AV groove. There it divides into the left anterior descending (LAD) coro-
nary artery and the circumf ex artery. The LAD travels within the anterior interventricular
groove toward the cardiac apex. During its descent on the anterior surface, the LAD gives off
septal branches that supply the anterior two thirds of the interventricular septum and the
apical portion of the anterior papillary muscle. The LAD also gives off diagonal branches that
supply the anterior surface of the left ventricle. The cireumf ex artery continues within the
left AV groove and passes around the left border of the heart to reach the posterior surface. It
gives off large obtuse marginal branches that supply the lateral and posterior wall of the left
ventricle.

The right coronary artery (RCA) travels in the right AV groove, passing posteriorly
between the right atrium and ventricle. It supplies blood to the right ventricle via acute
marginal branches. In most people, the distal RCA gives rise to a large branch, the posterior
descending artery (see Fig. 1-7C). This vessel travels from the inferoposterior aspect of the
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 9
Pulmonary artery
Left main
coronary artery
Left circumflex
coronary artery
. Left anterior
anual descending
coronary artery
A
Left circumflex Le ft circumflex
coronary artery coronary artery
Left anterior
descending
Right coronary artery Obtuse
coronary Diagonal marginal
artery branch branches Right
coronary
artery
Acute
marginal branch Posterior descending
B C coronary artery
HGURE 1-7. Qronary artery anatomy. A. Schematic representation of the right and left coronary arteries demonstrates
their orientation to one another. The left main artery bifurcates into the circumf ex artery, which perfuses the lateral and
posterior regions of the left ventricle (LV), and the anterior descending artery, which perfuses the LVanterior wall, the
anterior portion of the intraventricular septum, and a portion of the anterior right ventricular (RV) wall. The right coronary
artery (RCA) perfuses the right ventricle and variable portions of the posterior left ventricle through its terminal branches.
The posterior descending artery most often arises from the RCA B. Anterior view of the heart demonstrating the coronary
arteries and their major branches. C Posterior view of the heart demonstrating the terminal portions of the right and
circumf ex coronary arteries and their branches.
heart to the apex and supplies blood to the inferior and posterior walls of the ventricles and
the posterior one third of the interventricular septum. Just before giving off the posterior
descending branch, the RCA usually gives off the AV nodal artery.
and in such people, the coronary circulation is termed right dominant. In approximately 8%,
the posterior descending artery arises from the circumf ex artery instead, resulting in a left dom-
inant circulation. In the remaining population, the heart’s posterior blood supply is contributed
to from branches of both the RCA and the circumf ex, forming a codominant circulation.
10 chapter 1

The blood supply to the SA node is also most often (70% of the time) derived from the
RCA. However, in 25% of normal hearts, the SA nodal artery arises from the circumf ex
artery, and in 5% of cases, both the RCA and the circumf ex artery contribute to this vessel.

From their epicardial locations, the coronary arteries send perforating branches into the
ventricular muscle, which form a richly branching and anastomosing vasculature in the walls
of all the cardiac chambers. From this plexus arise a massive number of capillaries that form
an elaborate network surrounding each cardiac muscle fiber. The muscle fibers located just
beneath the endocardium, particularly those of the papillary muscles and the thick left ven-
tricle, are supplied either by the terminal branches of the coronary arteries or directly from the
ventricular cavity through tiny vascular channels, known as thebesian veins.

Collateral connections, usually less than 200 um in diameter, exist at the subarteriolar level
between the coronary arteries. In the normal heart, few of these collateral vessels are visible.
However, they may become larger and functional when atherosclerotic disease obstructs a
coronary artery, thereby providing blood f ow to distal portions of the vessel from a nonob-
structed neighbor.

Qronary Veins
The coronary veins follow a distribution similar to that of the major coronary arteries. These
vessels return blood from the myocardial capillaries to the right atrium predominantly via the
‘coronary sinus. The major veins lie in the epicardial fat, usually superficial to their arterial
counterparts. The thebesian veins, described earlier, provide an additional potential route for
a small amount of direct blood return to the cardiac chambers.

Lymphatic Vessels
The heart lymph is drained by an extensive plexus of valved vessels located in the subendo-
cardial connective tissue of all four chambers. This lymph drains into an epicardial plexus
from which are derived several larger lymphatic vessels that follow the distribution of the
coronary arteries and veins. Each of these larger vessels then combines in the AV groove to
form a single lymphatic conduit, which exits the heart to reach the mediastinal lymphatic
plexus and ultimately the thoracic duct.

Histology of Ventricular Myocardial Cells
The mature myocardial cell (also termed the myocyte) measures up to 25 um in diameter and
100 um in length. The cell shows a cross-striated banding pattern similar to that of the skeletal
muscle. However, unlike the multinucleated skeletal myofibers, myocardial cells contain only
one or two centrally located nuclei. Surrounding each myocardial cell is connective tissue
with a rich capillary network.

Each myocardial cell contains numerous myof brils, which are long chains of individual
sarcomeres, the fundamental contractile units of the cell (Fig. 1-8). Each sarcomere is made
up of two groups of overlapping filaments of contractile proteins. Biochemical and biophysi-
cal interactions occurring between these myofilaments produce muscle contraction. Their
structure and function are described later in the chapter.

Within each myocardial cell, the neighboring sarcomeres are all in register, producing
the characteristic cross-striated banding pattern seen by light microscopy. The relative den-
sities of the cross bands identify the location of the contractile proteins. Under physiologic
conditions, the overall sarcomere length (Z-to-Z distance) varies between 2.2 and 1.5 um
during the cardiac cycle. The larger dimension ref ects the fiber stretch during ventricular
filling, whereas the smaller dimension represents the extent of fiber shortening during
contraction.
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 11
Sarcoplasmic
Myo fibril reticulum Sarcolemma T tubule
FIGURE 1-8. Myocardial cell. Top. Schematic ' be
representation of the ultrastructure of
the myocardial cell. The cell consists of
multiple parallel myof brils surrounded by A
mitochondria. The Ttubules are invaginations b
of the cell membrane (the sarcolemma) that | Mian
increase the surface area for ion transport
and transmission of electrical impulses. The
intracellular sarcoplasmic reticulum houses
most of the intracellular calcium and abuts aS A a i
the Ttubules. (Modif ed from Katz AM \ /
Physiology of the Heart. 2nd ed. New York, NY:
Raven Press; 1992:21). Bottom. Expanded
view of a sarcomere, the basic unit of
contraction. Each myof bril consists of serially
connected sarcomeres that extend from one Z
line to the next. The sarcomere is composed
of alternating thin (actin) and thick (myosin) Z Actin Myosin Titin Z
myof laments. Titin is a protein that tethers ——E
myosin to the Zline and provides elasticity. Sarcomere
The myocardial cell membrane is named the sarcolemma. A specialized region of the mem-
brane is the intercalated disk, a distinct characteristic of cardiac muscle tissue. Intercalated disks
are seen on light microscopic study as darkly staining transverse lines that cross chains of cardiac
cells at irregular intervals. They represent the gap junction complexes at the interface of adjacent
cardiac f bers and establish structural and electrical continuity between the myocardial cells.
Another functional feature of the cell membrane is the transverse tubular system (or
T tubules). This complex system is characterized by deep, fngerlike invaginations of the
sarcolemma (Fig. 1-9; see also Fig. 1-8). Similar to the intercalated disks, transverse tubular
membranes establish pathways for rapid transmission of the excitatory electrical impulses
that initiate contraction. The T tubule system increases the surface area of the sarcolemma
( T tubule
Sarcolemma
FIGURE 1-9. Schematic view |
of the tubular systems of the | |
myocardial cell. The T tubules, i
invaginations of the sarcolemma, |
abut the sarcoplasmic reticulum a
at right angles at the terminal
cisternae sacs. This relationship | |
is important in linking membrane A —————<oo .
excitation with intracellular
release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Terminal cisternae
12 chapter 1
in contact with the extracellular environment, allowing the transmembrane ion transport
accompanying excitation and relaxation to occur quickly and synchronously.

The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR, the myocyte analog of the endoplasmic reticulum) is
an extensive intracellular tubular membrane network that complements the T tubule system
both structurally and functionally. The SR abuts the T tubules at right angles in lateral sacs,
called the terminal cisternae (see Fig. 1-9). These sacs house most of intracellular calcium
stores; the release of these stores is important in linking membrane excitation with activation
of the contractile apparatus. Lateral sacs also abut the intercalated disks and the sarcolemma,
providing each with a complete system for excitation—contraction coupling.

To serve the tremendous metabolic demand placed on the heart and the need for a con-
stant supply of high-energy phosphates, the myocardial cell has an abundant concentration of
mitochondria. These organelles are located between the individual myofibrils and constitute
approximately 35% of cell volume (see Fig. 1-8).

BASIC ELECTROPHYSI OLOGY
Rhythmic contraction of the heart relies on the organized propagation of electrical impulses
along its conduction pathway. The marker of electrical stimulation, the action potential, is cre-
ated by a sequence of ion f uxes through specific channels in the sarcolemma. To provide a basis
for understanding how electrical impulses lead to cardiac contraction, the process of cellular
depolarization and repolarization is reviewed here. This material serves as an important founda-
tion for topics addressed later in the book, including electrocardiography (see Chapter 4), cardiac
arrhythmias (see Chapters 11 and 12), and the actions of antiarrhythmic drugs (see Chapter 17).

Cardiac cells capable of electrical excitation are of three electrophysiologic types, the prop-
erties of which have been studied by intracellular microelectrode and patch-clamp recordings:
1. Pacemaker cells (e.g., SA node, AV node)

2. Specialized rapidly conducting tissues (e.g., Purkinje fibers)
3. Ventricular and atrial muscle cells

The sarcolemma of each of these cardiac cell types is a phospholipid bilayer that, by itself, is
largely impermeable to ions. There are specialized proteins interspersed throughout the mem-
brane that serve as ion channels, passive cotransporters, and active transporters (Fig. 1-10).
These help to maintain ionic concentration gradients and charge differentials between the
inside and the outside of the cardiac cells. Note that normally the Na* and Ca** concentrations
are much higher outside the cell, and the K* concentration is much higher inside.

Ion Movement and Channels
The movement of specific ions across the cell membrane serves as the basis of the action
potential. Passive ion movement depends on two major factors: (1) the energetic favorability
and (2) the permeability of the membrane for the ion.

Fnergetics
The two major forces that drive the direction of passive ion f ux are the concentration gradient
and the transmembrane potential (voltage). Molecules diffuse from areas of high concentra-
tion to areas of lower concentration, and the gradient between these values is a determinant
of the rate of ion fow. For example, the extracellular Na* concentration is normally 145 mM,
while the concentration inside the myocyte is 15 mM. As a result, a strong diffusive force
tends to drive Na‘ into the cell, down its concentration gradient.

The transmembrane potential of cells exerts an electrical force on ions (i.e., like charges
repel one another, and opposite charges attract). The transmembrane potential of a myocyte
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 13
Na* Ca**
K*
GAP
=> JUNCTION G = Internal
ATP [Na*] 15 mM
Cat+ [K*] 150 mM
[Cr] 5 mM
[Ca**] 107M
= Na* Ca** =
ATP ATP
D E F
Na* Ca** External
Kt [Na*] 145 mM
[K"] 5 mM
[cr]  120mM
[Ca**] 2 mM
HGURE1-10. Ton channels, cotransporters, and active transporters of the myocyte. A. Sodium entry
through the fast sodium channel is responsible for the rapid upstroke (phase 0) of the action potential (AP)
in nonpacemaker cells. BR Galcium enters the cell through calcium channel during phase 2 of the Purkinje f ber
and muscle cell AP and is the main channel responsible for depolarization of pacemaker cells. C Potassium
exits through a number of different potassium channels to repolarize the cell, and open potassium channels
contribute to the resting potential (phase 4) of nonpacemaker cells. D. Sodium—calcium exchanger helps
maintain the low intracellular calctum concentration. E Sodium—potassium AIPase maintains concentration
gradients for these ions. K G Active calcium transporters aid removal of calcium to the external environment
and into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, respectively.
at rest is about —90 mV (the inside of the cell is negative relative to the outside). Extracellular
Na*, a positively charged ion, is therefore attracted to the relatively negatively charged inte-
rior of the cell. Thus, there is a strong tendency for Na* to enter the cell and remain there,
because of the steep concentration gradient and the electrical attraction.
Permeability
If there is such a strong force driving Na* into the cell, what keeps this ion from actually mov-
ing inside? The membrane of the cell at its resting potential is not permeable to sodium. The
phospholipid bilayer of the cell membrane is composed of a hydrophobic core that does not
allow simple passage of charged, hydrophilic particles. Instead, permeability of the membrane
is dependent on the opening of specifc ion channels, specialized proteins that span the cell
membrane and contain hydrophilic pores through which certain charged atoms can pass under
specif c circumstances. Typically, one cell’s sarcolemma contains a million or more such chan-
nels. Each type of channel is normally selective for a specif c ion, which is a manifestation of the
size and structure of its pore. For example, in cardiac cells, some channels permit the passage of
sodium ions, some are specif c for potassium, and others allow only calcium to transit through.
Ions can pass through their specifc channels only at certain times. That is, ion channels
are gated—at any given moment, a channel is either open or closed. The more time a chan-
nel is in its open state, the larger the number of ions that can pass through it and therefore,
the greater the transmembrane current. The voltage across the membrane determines what
14 chapter 1
fraction of channels is open at a given time. Therefore, the gating of channels is said to be
voltage sensitive. As the membrane voltage changes during depolarization and repolariza-
tion of the cell, specific channels open and close, with corresponding alterations in the ion
fuxes across the sarcolemma.

An example of voltage-sensitive gating is apparent in the cardiac channel known as the fast
sodium channel. The transmembrane protein that forms this channel assumes various con-
formations depending on the cell’s membrane potential (Fig. 1-11). At a voltage of —-90 mV

CHANNEL CLOSED = =——————————~ CHANNEL OPEN
(RESTING) Rapid depolarization
Activation
gate nt Na*
—
IV II
Outside tee tee ee a
Cell ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( (
membrane
Inside oe © a ++4+4+ © TERS
Inactivation gate
A B
Na*
%
“0
%, >
S e
*, S
a
CHANNEL CLOSED
(INACTIVE)
++44+ ) ttt t
C
HGURE1-11. Schematic representation of gating of fast sodium channels. A. Four covalently linked
transmembrane domains (J, IJ, III, and IV form the sodium channel, which is guarded by activation and
inactivation gates. (Here, domain I is cut away to show the transmembrane pore.) In the resting membrane,
most channels are in a closed state. Even though the inactivation gate is open, Na* ions cannot easily pass
through because the activation gate is closed. B. Arapid depolarization changes the cell membrane voltage
and forces the activation gate to open, presumably mediated by translocation of the charged portions of a
segment in each domain. Wth the channel in this conformation (in which both the activation and inactivation
gates are open), Na* ions permeate into the cell. C As the inactivation gate spontaneously closes, the sodium
current ceases. The inactivation gating function is thought to be achieved by a peptide loop that connects
domains III and IV which translocates into the intracellular opening of the channel pore (black arrow). The
channel cannot reopen directly from this closed, inactive state. Gllular repolarization returns the channel
to the resting condition (A). During repolarization, as high negative membrane voltages are reachieved, the
activation gate closes and the inactivation gate reopens.
Normal Cardiac Structure and Function 15
(the typical resting voltage of a ventricular muscle cell), the channels are predominantly in a
closed, resting state, such that Na* ions cannot pass through (Fig. 1-11A). In this resting state,
the channels are available for conversion to the open configuration.

A rapid wave of depolarization renders the membrane potential less negative, and this acti-
vates the resting channels to change conformation to the open state (see Fig. 1-11B). Na* ions
readily permeate through the open channels, constituting an inward Na* current that further
depolarizes the cell. However, the activated channels remain open for only a brief time, a few
thousandths of a second, and then spontaneously close to an inactive state (see Fig. 1-11C).
Channels in the inactivated conformation cannot be directly converted back to the open state.

The inactivated state persists until the membrane voltage has been repolarized nearly
back to its original resting level. Until then, the inactivated channel conformation maintains
a closed pore that prevents any f ow of sodium ions. Thus, during normal cellular depolariza-
tion, the voltage-dependent fast sodium channels conduct for a short period and then inac-
tivate, unable to conduct current again until the cell membrane has nearly fully repolarized,
and the channels recover from the inactivated to the closed resting state.

Another important attribute of cardiac fast sodium channels should be noted. If the trans-
membrane voltage of a cardiac cell is slowly depolarized and maintained chronically at levels
less negative than the usual resting potential, inactivation of channels occurs without ini-
tial opening and current f ow. Furthermore, as long as this partial depolarization exists, the
closed, inactive channels cannot recover to the resting state. Thus, the fast sodium channels
in such a cell are persistently unable to conduct Na‘ ions. This is the typical case in cardiac
pacemaker cells (e.g., the SA and AV nodes) in which the membrane voltage is generally less
negative than —70 mV throughout the cardiac cycle. As a result, the fast sodium channels in
pacemaker cells are persistently inactivated and do not play a role in the generation of the
action potential in these cells.

Calcium and potassium channels in cardiac cells also act in voltage-dependent fashions,
but they behave differently than the sodium channels, as described later.

Resting Potential
In nonpacemaker cardiac cells at rest, prior to excitation, the electrical charge differential
between the inside and outside of a cell corresponds to the resting potential. The magnitude
of the resting potential of a cell depends on two main properties: (1) the concentration gra-
dients for all the different ions between the inside and outside of the cell and (2) the relative
permeabilities of ion channels that are open at rest.

As in other tissues such as nerve cells and skeletal muscle, the potassium concentra-
tion is much greater inside cardiac cells compared with outside. This is attributed mainly to
the cell membrane transporter Na*K*-ATPase (see Fig. 1-10). This protein “pump” actively
extrudes 3 Na* ions out of the cell in exchange for the inward movement of 2 K* ions in an
ATP-dependent process. This acts to maintain intracellular Na* at low levels and intracellular
K’ at high levels.

Cardiac myocytes contain a set of potassium channels (termed inward rectif er potassium
channels) that are open in the resting state, at a time when other ionic channels (e.g., sodium
and calcium) are closed. Therefore, the resting cell membrane is much more permeable
to potassium than to other ions. As a result, K* fows in an outward direction down its
concentration gradient, removing positive charges from the cell. As potassium ions exit the
cell, negatively charged anions that are impermeant to passage are left behind, causing the
interior of the cell to become electrically negative with respect to the outside.

As the interior of the cell becomes more negatively charged by the outward fux of potas-
sium, the positively charged K’ ions are attracted back by the electrical potential toward the
cellular interior, slowing their net exit from the cell. Thus, the K* concentration gradient
and the electrostatic force oppose each other (Fig. 1-12). At equilibrium, these forces are
16 (chapter 1
Open
potassium
channels
Ly, Inside cell HGURE1-12. ‘The resting potential of a
CONCENTRATION §[K*]out | IK*]in cardiac muscle cell is determined by the
GRADIENT (5 mM) . \ (150 mM) balance between the concentration gradient
+ = and electrostatic forces for potassium, because
, 7 I- only potassium channels are open at rest. The
roRCR K ie concentration gradient favors outward movement
48 of K’, whereas the electrical force attracts the
positively charged K’ ions inward. The resting
potential is approximated by the Nernst equation
Equilibrium (Nernst) potential = —26.7 In ([K"Jin/[K Jou) = —91 mV for potassium, as shown here.
balanced, and there is zero net movement of K* across the membrane. The electrical poten-
tial at which that occurs is known as the potassium equilibrium potential and in ventricular
myocytes is —91 mV, as calculated by the Nernst equation, shown in Figure 1-12. Since at rest
the membrane is almost exclusively permeable to potassium ions alone, this value closely
approximates the cell’s resting potential.

The permeability of the cardiac myocyte cellular membrane for sodium is minimal in the
resting state because the channels that conduct that ion are essentially closed. However, there
is a slight leak of sodium ions into the cell at rest. This small inward current of positively
charged ions explains why the actual resting potential is slightly less negative (-90 mV) than
would be predicted if the cell membrane were truly only permeable to potassium. The sodium
ions that slowly leak into the myocyte at rest (and the much larger amount that enters during
the action potential) are continuously removed from the cell and returned to the extracellular
environment by Na*K*-ATPase, as previously described.

Action Potential
When the cell membrane’s voltage is altered, its permeability to specif c ions changes because
of the voltage-gating characteristics of the ion channels. Each type of channel has a charac-
teristic pattern of activation and inactivation that determines the progression of the electrical
signal. The ionic currents that pass through the channels discussed in this chapter are listed
in Table 1-1. This description begins by following the development of the action potential in
a typical cardiac muscle cell (Fig. 1-13). The unique characteristics of action potentials in
cardiac pacemaker cells are described thereafter.
Gurrent Description
I; Pacemaker current; responsible for phase 4 depolarization in pacemaker cells
In Na** current; responsible for phase 0 rapid depolarization in nonpacemaker cells
Tar Slow, long-lasting G** current; responsible for phase 0 depolarization in pacemaker cells,
and major contributor to inward current during phase 2 of nonpacemaker cells
Ta Maintains resting potential; current of the inward rectifying potassium channel
Mrs Transient outward potassium current; responsible for phase 1 of action potential
| ae Delayed rectif er potassium currents of slow (Ix) and rapid (I,) types; repolarizing
currents that are active during phases 2 and 3 of action potential
a
Normal Cardiac Structure and Function 17
Cardiac Muscle Cll L Cat inward and
Until stimulated, the resting potential of 0 KY outward
a cardiac muscle cell remains stable, at 2
approximately —90 mV. This resting state 0 3
before depolarization is known as phase 4 50 K*
of the action potential. Following phase 4, Nat outward
four additional phases characterize depo- inward
larization and repolarization of the cell (see 4
Fig. 1-13). —100
0
Phase 0 :
Wa
At the resting membrane voltage, sodium
and calcium channels are closed. Any pro-
cess that makes the membrane potential 0
less negative than the resting value causes
some sodium channels to open. As these leat
channels open, sodium ions rapidly enter
the cell, fowing down their concentration
gradient toward the negatively charged cel-
lular interior. The entry of Na* ions into he
the cell causes the transmembrane poten- J Tf
tial to become progressively less negative, 0
which in turn causes more sodium chan-
nels to open and promotes further sodium
entry into the cell. When the membrane a
voltage approaches the threshold potential 0
(approximately —70 mV in cardiac muscle
cells), enough of these fast Na* channels Iks Fer
have opened to generate a self-sustaining Ie ks ~ = .
inward Na‘ current (termed Iy,). The entry 0 ==
of positively charged Na* ions at and beyond FIGURE 1-13. Schematic representation of a
threshold exceeds the exit of K* ions through myocyte action potential (AP) and major ionic
the open inward rectifier channels, such that currents. The resting potential is represented
the cell continues to depolarize, transiently by phase 4 of the AP. During depolarization, Na*
to a net positive potential. influx (Ij) results in the rapid upstroke of phase
The prominent infux of sodium ions is 0; a transient outward potassium current (I,,) is
responsible for the rapid upstroke, or phase responsible for partial repolarization during phase
. . , 1; slow G@** influx (Iq) balanced by K’ efflux (1x
0, of the action potential. However, the Na and I,,) results in the plateau of phase 2; and fnal
channels remain open for only a few thou- rapid repolarization results largely from further K’
sandths of a second and are then quickly efflux during phase 3. The resting potential of phase
inactivated, preventing further infux (see 4 is maintained primarily by the current I, through
Fig. 1-13). Thus, while activation of these fast inward rectif er potassium channels.
Na* channels causes the rapid early depolar-
ization of the cell, the rapid inactivation makes their major contribution to the action poten-
tial short lived.
Phase 1
Following rapid phase 0 depolarization into the positive voltage range, a brief current of
repolarization during phase | returns the membrane potential to approximately 0 mV.
18 chapter 1
The responsible current (termed I,,) is carried by the outward fow of K* ions through a type
of transiently activated potassium channel.

Phase 2
This relatively long “plateau” phase of the action potential is mediated by the balance of
outward K* currents (known as Ik, and Ik,) carried through voltage-gated delayed rectif er K*
channels, in competition with an inward Ca** current, which fows through specific L-type
calcium channels. The latter channels begin to open during phase 0, when the membrane
voltage reaches approximately —40 mV, allowing Ca** ions to fow down their concentra-
tion gradient into the cell (this current is termed I,,,). Ca** entry proceeds in a more gradual
fashion than the initial inf ux of sodium, because with calcium channels, activation is slower
and the channels remain open much longer compared with sodium channels (see Fig. 1-13).
During this phase, the near equality of current from inward Ca** inf ux and outward K* eff ux
results in nearly zero net current, and the membrane voltage does not change for a prolonged
period, which accounts for the fat plateau portion of the action potential curve. Calcium ions
that enter the cell during this phase play a critical role in triggering additional internal calcium
release from the SR, which is important in initiating myocyte contraction, as discussed later
in this chapter. As the Ca** channels gradually inactivate and the charge effux of K* begins
to exceed the charge inf ux of calcium, phase 3 begins.

Phase 3
This is the final phase of repolarization that returns the transmembrane voltage back to the
resting potential of approximately —90 mV. A continued outward potassium current exceeds
the low inward current of other cations and is thus responsible for this period of rapid repo-
larization. Phase 3 completes the action potential cycle, with a return to resting phase 4,
preparing the cell for the next stimulus for depolarization.

To preserve normal transmembrane ionic concentration gradients, sodium and calcium
ions that enter the cell during depolarization must be returned to the extracellular environ-
ment, and potassium ions must return to the cell interior. As shown in Figure 1-10, Ca**
ions are removed by the sarcolemmal Na*—Ca** exchanger and to a lesser extent by the ATP-
energized calcium pump (sarcolemmal Ca**-ATPase). The corrective exchange of Na* and K*
across the cell membrane is mediated by Na‘K*-ATPase, as described earlier.

Specialized @nduction System
The process described in the previous sections applies to the action potential of cardiac mus-
cle cells. The cells of the specialized conduction system (e.g., Purkinje fibers) behave simi-
larly, although the resting potential is slightly more negative and the upstroke of phase 0 is
even more rapid, due to a greater presence of Na* channels in these tissues.

Pacemaker Cells
The upstroke of the action potential of cardiac muscle cells does not normally occur sponta-
neously. Rather, when a wave of depolarization reaches the myocyte through the electrical
junctions with neighboring cells, its membrane potential becomes less negative and an action
potential is triggered.

Conversely, certain heart cells do not require external provocation to initiate their action
potential. Rather, they are capable of self-initiated depolarization in a rhythmic fashion and
are known as pacemaker cells. They are endowed with the property of automaticity, by
which the cells undergo spontaneous depolarization during phase 4. When the threshold volt-
age is reached in such cells, an action potential upstroke is triggered (Fig. 1-14).
Normal Cardiac Structure and Function 19
Cells that display pacemaker behavior include

the SA node (the “natural pacemaker” of the 0 1.--------------- fp \ eee

heart) and the AV node. Although atrial and Ca** influx

ventricular muscle cells do not normally display (Ica 1) Kt efflux

automaticity, they may do so under disease condi- 0 (Iz, and Ix,)

tions such as ischemia.

The shape of the action potential of a pace- “40 4

maker cell is different from that of a ventricular ly

muscle cell in three ways:

1. The maximum negative voltage of pacemaker —80
cells is approximately —60 mV, substantially Time
less negative than the resting potential of ven- HIGURE1-14. Action potential of a
tricular muscle cells (-90 mV). The persistently pacemaker cell. Phase 4 is characterized by
less negative membrane voltage of pacemaker _g!dual, spontaneous depolarization owing to
cells causes the fast sodium channels within th Pacemaker current (I;). When the threshold
these cells to remain inactivated. potential ts reached, at about —40 mv the

; ; upstroke of the action potential follows.

2. Unlike that of cardiac muscle cells, phase 4 of 4, upstroke of phase 0 is less rapid than
the pacemaker cell action potential is not fat in nonpacemaker cells because the current
but has an upward slope, representing sponta- represents Ga** inf ux through the relatively
neous gradual depolarization. This spontane- slow calcium channels (I...). Repolarization
ous depolarization is the result of an ionic fux occurs with inactivation of the calcium channels
known as the pacemaker current (denoted by and K’ eff ux from the cell through potassium
I, see Table 1-1). The pacemaker current is car- channels (Ix, and Tic).
ried predominantly by Na’ ions. The ion chan-
nel through which the pacemaker current passes is different from the fast sodium channel
responsible for phase 0 of the action potential. Importantly, this pacemaker channel opens
in the very negative voltage ranges reached during repolarization of the cell. The inf ux of
positively charged Na* ions through the pacemaker channel causes the membrane potential
to become progressively less negative during phase 4, ultimately depolarizing the cell to its
threshold voltage (see Fig. 1-14).

3. The phase 0 upstroke of the pacemaker cell action potential is less rapid and reaches a
lower amplitude than that of a cardiac muscle cell. These characteristics result from the
fast sodium channels of the pacemaker cells being inactivated and the upstroke of the
action potential relying solely on Ca** inf ux through the relatively slow calcium channels.
Repolarization of pacemaker cells occurs in a fashion similar to that of ventricular muscle

cells and relies on inactivation of the calcium channels and increased activation of potassium

channels with enhanced K* eff ux from the cell.
Refractory Periods

Compared with electrical impulses in nerves and skeletal muscle, the cardiac action potential

is much longer in duration, supporting prolonged Ca** entry and muscle contraction during

systole. This results in a prolonged period of channel inactivation during which the muscle
is refractory (unresponsive) to restimulation. Such a long period is physiologically necessary
because it allows the ventricles sufficient time to relax and refill before the next contraction.

There are different levels of refractoriness during the action potential of a myocyte, as
illustrated in Figure 1-15. The degree of refractoriness primarily ref ects the percentage of fast

Na‘ channels that have recovered from their inactive state and are capable of reopening. As

phase 3 of the action potential progresses, an increasing number of Na* channels recover from

inactivated to resting states and can then open in response to the next depolarization. This, in
turn, corresponds to an increasing probability that a stimulus will trigger an action potential
and result in a propagated impulse.
20 chapter |
HGURE1-15. Refractory periods
, @ (RPs) of the myocyte. During the
absolute refractory period (ARP), the
1 \ 2) cell is unexcitable to stimulation. The
50 effective refractory period includes
Absolute + | a brief time beyond the ARP during
RP which stimulation produces a localized
rt depolarization that does not propagate
' at (curve 1). During the relative refractory
—100 — period, stimulation produces a weak
‘ N 7 action potential (AP) that propagates,
NTN scp but more slowly than usual (curve
; 2). During the supranormal period,
Effective Relative period a weaker-than-normal stimulus can
RP RP trigger an AP (curve 3).

The absolute refractory period refers to the time during which the cell is completely unexcit-
able to any new stimulation. The effective refractory period includes the absolute refractory period
but extends beyond it to include a short interval of phase 3, during which stimulation produces
a localized action potential that is not strong enough to propagate further. The relative refractory
period is the interval during which stimulation triggers an action potential that is conducted, but
the rate of rise of the action potential is lower during this period because some of the Na* chan-
nels are inactivated and some of the delayed rectifier K* channels remain activated, thus reducing
the available net inward current. Following the relative refractory period, a short “supranormal”
period is present in which a less-than-normal stimulus can trigger an action potential.

The refractory period of atrial cells is shorter than that of ventricular muscle cells, such that
atrial rates can generally exceed ventricular rates during rapid arrhythmias (see Chapter 11).

Impulse Gonduction
During depolarization, the electrical impulse spreads along each cardiac cell, and rapidly from
cell to cell because each myocyte is connected to its neighbors through low-resistance gap junc-
tions. Gap junctions are a special type of ion channel that provide electrical and biochemical
coupling between cardiac myocytes, allowing the action potential to spread rapidly through the
myocardium. The speed of tissue depolarization (phase 0) and the conduction velocity along
the cell depend on the net inward current (which is largely dependent on the number of sodium
channels), on the value of the resting potential (which sets the degree of Na* channel inactiva-
tion), and on the resistance to current f ow between cells though the gap junctions. Tissues with
a high concentration of Na‘ channels, such as Purkinje fibers, have a large, fast inward current,
which spreads quickly within and between cells to support rapid conduction. However, the less
negative the resting potential, the greater the fraction of fast sodium channels that are in the
inactivated state and the less rapid the upstroke velocity (Fig. 1-16). Thus, alterations in the rest-
ing potential significantly impact the upstroke and conduction velocity of the action potential.
Normal Sequence of Cardiac Depolarization

Electrical activation of the heartbeat is normally initiated at the SA node (see Fig. 1-6). The
impulse spreads to the surrounding atrial muscle through the intercellular gap junctions, pro-
viding electrical continuity between the cells. Ordinary atrial muscle fibers participate in the
propagation of the impulse from the SA to the AV node, although in certain regions the fibers
are more densely arranged, lowering intercellular resistance and thus facilitating conduction.

Fibrous tissue surrounds the tricuspid and mitral valves, such that there is no direct elec-
trical connection between the atrial and ventricular chambers other than through the AV
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 21
0 jH-------- Je me ----------- +--+ Ae ee ee ee eee
Phase
HGURE 1-16. Dependence of speed of 0
depolarization on resting potential.
A. Normal resting potential (RP) and aes nes Cnn Vy na VO
rapid rise of phase 0. B Less negative B
RP results in slower rise of phase 0 and A
lower maximum amplitude of the action
potential. —100
node. As the electrical impulse reaches the AV node, a delay in conduction (approximately
0.1 seconds) is encountered. This delay occurs because the small-diameter fbers in this
region conduct slowly, and the action potential is of the “slow” pacemaker type (recall that
the fast sodium channels are permanently inactivated in pacemaker tissues, such that the
upstroke velocity relies on the slower calctum channels). The pause in conduction at the AV
node is actually benef cial because it allows the atria time to contract and fully empty their
contents before ventricular stimulation. In addition, the delay allows the AV node to serve as
a “gatekeeper” of conduction from atria to ventricles, which is critical for limiting the rate of
ventricular stimulation during abnormally rapid atrial rhythms.

After traversing the AV node, the cardiac action potential spreads into the rapidly conduct-
ing bundle of His and Purkinje fbers, which distribute the electrical impulses to the bulk of
the ventricular muscle cells, in a spatially synchronized manner. This allows for precisely
timed stimulation and organized contraction of the ventricular myocytes, optimizing the vol-
ume of blood ejected by the heart.

EXC TATION— CONTRACTION COUPLING
This section reviews how the electrical action potential leads to physical contraction of cardiac
muscle cells, a process known as excitation—contraction coupling. During this process, chemi-
cal energy in the form of high-energy phosphate compounds is translated into the mechanical
energy of myocyte contraction.

Contractile Proteins in the Myocyte
Several distinct proteins are responsible for cardiac muscle cell contraction (Fig. 1-17). Of
the major proteins, actin and myosin are the chief contractile elements. Two other proteins,
tropomyosin and troponin, serve regulatory functions.

Myosin is arranged in thick flaments, each composed of lengthwise stacks of approxi-
mately 300 molecules. The myosin f lament exhibits globular heads that are evenly spaced

TnC
Actin : TaT Tropomyosin
Myosin heads
HGURE 1-17. Schematic diagram of the main sc? 2
contractile proteins of the myocyte, actin, and myosin.
Tropomyosin and troponin (components TnI, ToC and
TnT) are regulatory proteins. Myosin thick filament
22 (Chapter |
along its length and contain myosin ATPase, an enzyme that is necessary for contraction to
occur. Actin, a smaller molecule, is arranged in thin filaments as an a-helix consisting of two
strands that interdigitate between the thick myosin filaments (see Fig. 1-8). Titin (also termed
connectin) is a very large protein that helps tether myosin to the Z line of the sarcomere and
provides elasticity to the contractile process.

Tropomyosin is a double helix that lies in the grooves between the actin filaments and,
in the resting state, inhibits the interaction between myosin heads and actin, thus prevent-
ing contraction. Troponin sits at regular intervals along the actin strands and is composed
of three subunits. The troponin T (TnT) subunit links the troponin complex to the actin and
tropomyosin molecules. The troponin I (TnI) subunit inhibits the ATPase activity of the actin—
myosin interaction. The troponin C (TnC) subunit is responsible for binding calcium ions that
regulate the contractile process.

Calcium-Induced Gilcium Release and the Qontractile Cycle
The sensitivity of TnC to calcium establishes a crucial role for intracellular Ca** ions in cel-
lular contraction. The cycling of calcium in and out of the cytosol during each action potential
effectively couples electrical excitation to physical contraction.

Recall that during phase 2 of the action potential, activation of L-type Ca** channels results
in an inf ux of Ca** ions into the myocyte. The small amount of calcium that enters the cell
in this fashion is not sufficient to cause contraction of the myofibrils, but it triggers a much
greater Ca** release from the SR, as follows: The T tubule invaginations of the sarcolem-
mal membrane bring the L-type channels into close apposition with specialized Ca** release
receptors in the SR, known as ryanodine receptors (Fig. 1-18). When calcium enters the cell
and binds to the ryanodine receptor, the receptor changes to an open conformation, which
results in a much greater release of Ca** into the cytosol from the abundant stores in the
terminal cisternae of the SR. Thus, the initial L-type Ca** channel inf ux is amplified by this
mechanism, known as calcium-induced calcium release (CICR), and the cytosolic calctum
concentration dramatically increases.

Na a Na* FIGURE 1-18. Gilcium ion
Outside cell Ca movements during excitation and
contraction in cardiac muscle cells.
=a | 7-0 G** enters the cell through calcium
channels during phase 2 of the action
Ryanodine Catt Catt potential, triggering a much larger
receptor . Sarcoplasmic calcium release from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum reticulum (SR) via the ryanodine
Ca** receptor complex. The binding of
=e © cytosolic Ga** to troponin C(ThO
allows contraction to ensue. Relaxation
occurs as Ga** is returned to the SR by
sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum calcium
bas Ca™ ATPase (SERCA). Phospholamban
(PL) is a major regulator of this
PL pump, inhibiting G** uptake in
its dephosphorylated state. Excess
Catt intracellular calcium is returned to the
SLI extracellular environment by sodium—
calcium exchange and to a smaller
degree by the sarcolemmal Ga**-AlPase.
Normal Gardiac Structure and Function 23

As calcium ions bind to TnC, the activity of TnI is inhibited, which induces a conforma-
tional change in tropomyosin. The latter event exposes the active site between actin and
myosin, enabling contraction to proceed.

Contraction ensues as myosin heads bind to actin filaments and “fex,” thus causing the
interdigitating thick and thin filaments to move past each other in an ATP-dependent reaction
(Fig. 1-19). The first step in this process is activation of the myosin head by hydrolysis of ATP,
following which the myosin head binds to actin and forms a cross bridge. The interaction
between the myosin head and actin results in a conformational change in the head, causing
it to pull the actin filament inward.

Next, while the myosin head and actin are still attached, ADP is released, and a new
molecule of ATP then binds to the myosin head, causing it to release the actin filament. The
cycle can then repeat. Progressive coupling and uncoupling of actin and myosin cause the
muscle fiber to shorten by increasing the overlap between the myofilaments within each
sarcomere. In the presence of ATP, this process continues for as long as the cytosolic calcium
concentration remains sufficiently high to inhibit the troponin—tropomyosin blocking action.

Myocyte relaxation, like contraction, is synchronized with the electrical activity of the
cell. Toward the end of phase 2 of the action potential, L-type channels inactivate, arresting
the inf ux of Ca** into the cell and abolishing the trigger for CICR. Concurrently, calcium is
pumped back into the SR and out of the cell. Calcium is sequestered back into the SR primar-
ily by sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca** ATPase (SERCA), as shown in Figure 1-18. The
small amount of Ca** that entered the cell through L-type calcium channels is removed via

Actin
ATP
ADP ‘ Myosin y) “Ar? :
$.
| ADP-P,
HGURE1-19. The contractile process. A. Myosin head is activated by hydrolysis of AIP. B During cellular
depolarization, cytoplasmic calcium concentration increases and removes the troponin—tropomyosin inhibition,
such that a cross bridge is formed between actin and myosin. C Inorganic phosphate (P;) is released and a
conformational change in the myosin head draws the actin flament inward. D. ADP is released and replaced by
AIP, causing the myosin head to dissociate from the actin flament. As the process repeats, the muscle f ber
shortens. The cycle continues until cytosolic calctum concentration decreases at the end of phase 2 of the
action potential.
24 (chapter |
the sarcolemmal Na‘—Ca** exchanger and to a lesser extent by the ATP-consuming calcium
pump, sarcolemmal Ca**-ATPase (see Fig. 1-10).

As cytosolic Ca** concentrations fall and calcium ions dissociate from TnC, tropomyosin
once again inhibits the actin—myosin interaction, leading to relaxation of the contracted cell.
The contraction—relaxation cycle can then repeat with the next action potential.

p-Adrenergic and Cholinergic Signaling
There is substantial evidence that the concentration of Ca** within the cytosol is the major
determinant of the force of cardiac contraction with each heartbeat. Mechanisms that raise
intracellular Ca** concentration enhance force development, whereas factors that lower Ca**
concentration reduce the contractile force.

B-Adrenergic stimulation is one mechanism that enhances calcium fuxes in the myocyte
and thereby strengthens the force of ventricular contraction (Fig. 1-20). Catecholamines (e.g.,
norepinephrine) bind to the myocyte B,-adrenergic receptor, which is coupled to and activates
the G protein system (G,) attached to the inner surface of the cell membrane. G, in turn stimu-
lates membrane-bound adenylate cyclase to produce cyclic AMP (cAMP) from ATP. cAMP
then activates specific intracellular protein kinases (PKAs), which phosphorylate cellular

Norepinephrine Acetylcholine
B,-adrenergic | | Muscarinic an,
receptor ACOMYEIE receptor Ca
NAN cychse NAN
ef
Hn 26
' ij | y
— ©
Gs protein ATP G; protein
cAMP 3
wal \
: ++
ae nm Active Ca
inases .
protein
kinases ~, PL
Cat+ iS)
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum

HGURE 1-20. Effects of B-adrenergic and cholinergic stimulation on cardiac cellular signaling and calcium
ion movement. The binding of a ligand (e.g., norepinephrine) to the B,-adrenergic receptor induces Gprotein—
mediated stimulation of adenylate cyclase and formation of cyclic AMP (cAMP). The latter activates protein
kinases, which phosphorylate cellular proteins, including ion channels. Phosphorylation of the slow GQ** channel
enhances calcium movement into the cell and therefore strengthens the force of contraction. Protein kinases also
phosphorylate phospholamban (PL), reducing the latter’s inhibition of G** uptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
The enhanced removal of Gi** from the cytosol facilitates relaxation of the myocyte. Cholinergic signaling,
triggered by acetylcholine binding to the muscarinic receptor, activates inhibitory Gproteins that reduce
adenylate cyclase activity and cAMP production, thus antagonizing the effects of B-adrenergic stimulation.
Normal Cardiac Structure and Function 25
proteins, including the L-type calcium channels within the cell membrane. Phosphorylation
of the calcium channel augments Ca** inf ux, which triggers a corresponding increase in Ca**
release from the SR, thereby enhancing the force of contraction.

B-Adrenergic stimulation of the myocyte also enhances myocyte relaxation. The return of
Ca** from the cytosol to the SR is regulated by phospholamban (PL), a low molecular weight
protein in the SR membrane. In its dephosphorylated state, PL inhibits Ca** uptake by SERCA
(see Fig. 1-18). However, B-adrenergic activation of PKAs causes PL to become phosphory-
lated, an action that blunts PL’s inhibitory effect (see Fig. 1-20). The subsequently greater
uptake of calcium ions by the SR hastens Ca** removal from the cytosol, promoting myocyte
relaxation. The increased cAMP activity also results in phosphorylation of TnI, an action that
inhibits actin—myosin interactions and therefore further enhances relaxation of the cell.
Cholinergic signaling via parasympathetic inputs (mainly from the vagus nerve) opposes the
effects of B-adrenergic stimulation (see Fig. 1-20). Acetylcholine released from parasympathetic
nerve terminals binds to the muscarinic M, receptor on cardiac cells. This receptor also activates
G proteins, but in distinction to the B-adrenergic receptor, it is coupled to G, an inhibitory G
protein system. G; associated with cholinergic stimulation inhibits adenylate cyclase activity and
reduces cAMP formation. At the sinus node, these actions of cholinergic stimulation serve to
reduce heart rate. In the myocardium, the effect is to counteract the force of contraction induced
by B-adrenergic stimulation. It should be noted that ventricular cells are much less sensitive to
this cholinergic effect than atrial cells, likely ref ecting different degrees of G protein coupling.
Thus, physiologic or pharmacologic catecholamine stimulation of the myocyte B,-adrenergic
receptor enhances contraction of the cell, while cholinergic stimulation opposes that enhance-
ment. We will return to these important properties in later chapters.
SUMMARY
e This chapter has reviewed basic cardiac anatomy and cellular composition, the cardiac
conduction system, excitation—contraction coupling, and cardiac signaling systems. The
physiology of myocyte contraction will be described in Chapter 9. Each of these complex
pieces integrate together to form an organ system that functions in a organized fashion,
is robust to errors, and operates reliably over many years. As a result, the heart is capable
of purposeful stimulation billions of times during the life span of a normal person. With
each contraction cycle, the heart receives and propagates blood through the circulation to
provide nutrients to and remove waste products from the body’s tissues.
° The following chapters explore what can go wrong with this remarkable system.
Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Ken Young Lin, MD; Vivek Iyer, MD;
Kirsten Greineder, MD; Stephanie Harper, MD; Scott Hyver, MD; Paul Kim, MD; Rajeev
Malhotra, MD; Laurence Rhines, MD; and James D. Marsh, MD.
Additional Reading
Bers DM. Calcium cycling and signaling in cardiac myocytes. Saucerman JJ, McCulloch AD. Cardiac beta-adrenergic signal-
Annu Rev Physiol. 2008;70:23-49. ing: from subcellular microdomains to heart failure. Ann
Christoffels VM, Smits GJ, Kispert A, Moorman AFM. N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1080:348-—361.
Development of pacemaker tissues of the heart. Circ Res. Smyth JW, Shaw RM. Forward trafficking of ion chan-
2010; 106:240—254. nels: What the clinician needs to know. Heart Rhythm.
Courneya C, Parker MJ. Cardiovascular Physiology. A Clinical 2010;7:1135—1140.
Approach. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011. | Wilcox BR, Cook AC, Anderson RH. Surgical Anatomy of the
Grant AO. Cardiac ion channels. Cire Arrhythm Electrophysiol. Heart. 4th ed. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press;
2009;2:185-194. 2013.
Katz AM. Physiology of the Heart. Sth ed. Philadelphia, PA: Zipes DP, Jalife J, eds. Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010. Bedside. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013.
7 e
e
The Cardiac Cycle
Mechanisms of Heart
Sounds and Murmurs
David B. Fischer
Leonard S. Lilly
Chapter Outline C ardiac diseases often cause abnormal findings on physi-
a cal examination, including pathologic heart sounds and
Cardiac Cycle 4: . ‘
Heart Sounds murmurs. These findings are clues to the underlying pathophysi-
First Hsart-Sound(S) ology, and proper interpretation is essential for successful diag-
Second Heart Sound (S,) nosis and disease management. This chapter first describes heart
Extra Systolic Heart Sounds sounds in the context of normal cardiac physiology and then
Extra Diastolic Heart Sounds focuses on the origins of pathologic heart sounds and murmurs.
Marmurs Many cardiac diseases are mentioned brief y in this chapter as
ae “as examples of abnormal heart sounds and murmurs. Fach of these
a — conditions is described in greater detail later in the book, so it
is not necessary or desirable to memorize all of the examples
presented here. Rather, the goal of this chapter is to explain the
mechanisms by which the abnormal sounds are produced, so that
their descriptions will make sense in later chapters.
OO CARDIACOE
The cardiac cycle consists of precisely timed electrical and
mechanical events that are responsible for rhythmic atrial and
ventricular contractions. Figure 2-1 displays the pressure rela-
tionships between the left-sided cardiac chambers during the
normal cardiac cycle and serves as a platform for describing
key events. Mechanical systole refers to the phase of ventricu-
lar contraction, and diastole refers to the phase of ventricular
relaxation and f lling. Throughout the cardiac cycle, the right
and left atria accept blood returning to the heart from the
systemic veins and from the pulmonary veins, respectively.
During diastole, blood passes from the atria into the ventricles
across the open tricuspid and mitral valves, causing a gradual
increase in ventricular diastolic pressures. In late diastole,
atrial contraction propels a f nal bolus of blood into each ven-
tricle, an action that produces a brief further rise in atrial and
ventricle pressures, termed the a wave (see Fig. 2-1).
