' J ] a
Ginical Aspects of ia
p ti
Cardiac Arrhythmias | |)
I : a
y i
Morgan J. Prust
William G. Stevenson .
Leonard S. Lilly é
—
Chapter Outline Ce 11 presented the mechanisms by which abnormal
heart rhythms develop. This chapter describes how to rec-
EB mad vary tbmias ognize and treat specifc arrhythmias. Table 12-1 categorizes
Sinoatrial Node : : a
BR the common rhythm disorders considered in this chapter.
cape Rhythms :
ey ae reer There are f ve basic questions to consider when confronted
System with a patient with an abnormal heart rhythm, as detailed in
Tachyarrhythmias the sections that follow:
Supraventrictlar Arrhythmias
Ventricular Arrhythmias 1. Identif cation: What is arrhythmia?
2. Pathogenesis: What is the underlying mechanism?
3. Precipitating factors: What conditions provoke it?
4. Cinical presentation: What symptoms and signs accompany
the arrhythmia?
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
The normal resting heart rate, resulting from repetitive depo-
larization of the sinus node, ranges from 60 to 100 bpm.
Bradyarrhythmias are rhythms in which the heart rate is less
than 60 bpm. They arise from disorders of impulse formation
or impaired impulse conduction, as described in Chapter 11.
a Sinus Bradycardia
288 (Chapter 12
Location Bradyarrhythmias Tachyarrhythmias
SA node Sinus bradycardia Sinus tachycardia
Sick sinus syndrome
Atria Atrial premature beats
Atrial f utter
Atrial fibrillation
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias
Focal atrial tachycardia
Multifocal atrial tachycardia
AV node Qnduction blocks Paroxysmal reentrant tachycardias
Junctional escape rhythm (AV or AV nodal)
Ventricles Ventricular escape rhythm Ventricular premature beats
Ventricular tachycardia
Torsades de pointes
Ventricular fibrillation
ee
AV, atrioventricular; SA, sinoatrial.
atrium, including ischemic heart disease or cardiomyopathy. Extrinsic factors that suppress
SA nodal activity include medications (e.g., B-blockers and certain calcium channel blockers)
and metabolic causes (e.g., hypothyroidism).

Trained athletes often have elevated vagal tone, which results in physiologic and
asymptomatic resting sinus bradycardia. Transient periods of high vagal tone can also
occur in individuals as a ref ex response to pain or fear, resulting in inappropriate sinus
bradycardia.

Mild sinus bradycardia is usually asymptomatic and does not require treatment.
However, a pronounced reduction of the heart rate can produce a fall in cardiac output
with fatigue, light-headedness, confusion, or syncope. In such cases, any extrinsic pro-
vocative factors should be corrected, and specific therapy, as described in the next section,
may be needed.

Sick Sinus Syndrome
Intrinsic SA node dysfunction that causes periods of inappropriate bradycardia is known as
sick sinus syndrome (SSS). This condition often produces symptoms of dizziness, confusion,
or syncope. Patients with this syndrome (or any cause of symptomatic sinus bradycardia) can
be treated acutely with intravenous anticholinergic drugs (e.g., atropine) or B-adrenergic agents
(e.g., isoproterenol), which transiently accelerate the heart rate. If the problem is chronic and not
corrected by removal of aggravating factors, placement of a permanent pacemaker is required.
SE eat eee ee eee ere ee eee ea ee uae EE
RSGHEGHGHHOR | HORGEHOTGG4 edH04 cuSEySOROMIEVEGD ) Gu tuete oats ontstEateHeateiterl ; eal itaststandsteuiGeteiGafestetl | stestasts
BSGG# SEEESGSEHUSESEE tras SHnrs SOSSH SEEGE Setés Goes] UGGeN SUuGceRUGGEEE™ SEGGEENSEGGGEES CSGEs SuaGeCoaSCcESSUSEELTEOGS ct=a04gEEa
H@GURE 12-1. Sinus bradycardia. The P wave and QRS complexes are normal, but the rate is less than 60 bpm.
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 289
Gara fasus pects aces ceacy cones veces coue crane casts Gray E#Tas OUNaT F0n0E0Qra enue Cane Ceaiy Coxid rune] CagUt COGsC#TeRt ESEEEAEEED
BEES Sonzy HEGES ORES ESSE; GEES FnEEs Gans Se05e senns e000 Seana 0ane¢ coves ace! er7 00 ceeed Fl nT00ee0 F200 canes CEaGeGeees S000! GEu00
TPES ag erect ee ee Ee ee Te EE ey
Eee eeereeertti err eee ee eee tee teeter tee eee eee ee
EERE HE EEE CEE EEE EEE EEE CCC EEE CECE CEE EE EEE EEE CECE EERE CREE EEE CEE
FETSOGEETLG;EEH FEGEESET SS GOSS ]000/ S000 Gouna cess duGed SuGEE Gens s lead” 25008 EHSGECGENS SGEEH Sa0GeEnTE0 ERTS GSEESSEGEH SUUEEGERET
HGURE 12-2. Bradycardia—tachycardia syndrome. A brief irregular tachycardia is followed by slow sinus
node discharge.

SSS is common in elderly patients, who are also susceptible to supraventricular tachycar-
dias (SVTs), most commonly atrial fibrillation (AF). This combination of slow and fast dys-
rhythmias is known as the bradycardia—tachycardia syndrome (Fig. 12-2) and is thought
to result from atrial fibrosis that impairs function of the SA node and predisposes to AF and
atrial futter. During the tachyarrhythmia, overdrive suppression of the SA node occurs (as
described in Chapter 11), and when the tachycardia terminates, a period of profound sinus
bradycardia may ensue. Treatment generally requires the combination of antiarrhythmic
drug therapy to suppress the tachyarrhythmias plus a permanent pacemaker to prevent
bradycardia.

Fscape Rhythms
Cells in the atrioventricular (AV) node and His—Purkinje system are capable of automaticity
but typically have slower firing rates than do those in the sinus node and are therefore sup-
pressed during normal sinus rhythm. However, if SA node activity becomes impaired or if
there is conduction block of the impulse from the SA node, escape rhythms can emerge from
the more distal latent pacemakers (Fig. 12-3).

Junctional escape beats arise from the AV node or proximal bundle of His. They are
characterized by a normal, narrow QRS complex, and when they occur in sequence
(termed a junctional escape rhythm), appear at a rate of 40 to 60 bpm. The QRS com-
plexes are not preceded by normal P waves because the impulse originates below the

| 1 ; t cee Pett tt t t } iti ii

ETS ES fn ee

EE ES erect eee ee Tee HL

EE eae (eae eu au eu | Ge AE oR EU EE eu ee |

i iE Ev EEE a
Pee a

EREEEESEESEEESU LESSEE Pee in iii : sass: niin

ESSERE ESHER EEE ESSE SLES ESE EEE

Gah i

SET TT TE Te ee Cee EE EE ine tae iae cH aeeiem eee

GEUEE EERSTE BR DSU SSSEE EERE PEER ESET EEE ED SPECS SESE daca cnet (ud tte, net Gane catego

sossesesetaaeesrfetaeedt tbssscssronerazect urea seedl tones ittasecazsecaztezatsauseszetsietessthal senna eee aaaeaes
B CSREES ES EEE eS ESE TETSU ESTES PETES EE
HGURE12-3 Escape rhythms. No P waves are evident. A. Junctional escape rhythm with normal-width QRS
complexes. B. Wde QRS complexes typical of a ventricular escape rhythm.
290 chapter 12
atria. However, retrograde P waves may be observed as an impulse propagates from the
more distal pacemaker backward to the atrium. Retrograde P waves typically follow the
QRS complex and are abnormally inverted (negative def ection on the electrocardiogram
[ECG]) in limb leads I, II, and aVF, indicating activation of the atria from the inferior
direction.

Ventricular escape rhythms are characterized by even slower rates (30 to 40 bpm) and
abnormally widened QRS complexes. The complexes are wide because the ventricles are
not depolarized by the normal rapid simultaneous conduction over the right and left bundle
branches but rather from a more distal point in the conduction system. The morphology that
the QRS shows depends on the site of origin of the escape rhythm. For example, an escape
rhythm originating from the left bundle branch will cause a right bundle branch block QRS
pattern, because the impulse depolarizes the left ventricle first and then spreads more slowly
through the right ventricle (RV). Conversely, an escape rhythm originating in the right bun-
dle branch causes the QRS to appear with a left bundle branch block configuration. Escape
rhythms that originate more distally, in the ventricular myocardium itself, are characterized
by even wider QRS complexes because such impulses are conducted outside the rapidly
propagating Purkinje fibers.

Junctional and ventricular escape rhythms are protective backup mechanisms that main-
tain a heartbeat and cardiac output when the sinus node or normal AV conduction fails. The
clinical findings and treatment of bradycardia associated with escape rhythms are identical to
those of SSS described earlier.

Atrioventricular Gonduction System
The AV conduction system includes the AV node, bundle of His, and the left and right bundle
branches. Impaired conduction between the atria and ventricles can result in three degrees
(types) of AV conduction block.

Kirst-Degree AV Block
First-degree AV block, shown in Figure 12-4, indicates prolongation of the normal delay
between atrial and ventricular depolarization, such that the PR interval is lengthened (>0.2
seconds, which is >5 small boxes on the ECG). In this situation, the 1:1 relationship between
P waves and QRS complexes is preserved. The impairment of conduction is usually within
the AV node itself and can be caused by a transient reversible inf uence or a structural defect.
Reversible causes include heightened vagal tone, transient AV nodal ischemia, and drugs
that depress conduction through the AV node, including B-blockers, certain calcium channel
antagonists, digitalis, and other antiarrhythmic medications. Structural causes of first-degree
AV block include myocardial infarction and chronic degenerative diseases of the conduction
system, which commonly occur with aging.
a i
Este ae lar ane nen ae eeefaeain Gee eee eerste seeaseel et oT) erat ae
ae A I A
pide ee
Ear eae le lee ae eee gen a ae ae bene ane aed oe ecco eer ee Ge eet Peg
HGURE 12-4. First-degree AV block. The PR interval is prolonged.
Cinical Aspects of Cardiac Arrhythmias 291
SUA OIA AREAS
UIA A IAEA A
pepe veitcfeet certs |) fetesret jeesre| destetr crea
Pott, P Fe +4 Pp eae iS a P feeei coord Perr -P } poh P ps enatd snes . 28 Senne eee
HGURE12-5. Second-degree AV block: type I (Wenckebach). The P-wave rate is constant, but the PR
interval progressively lengthens until a QRS is completely blocked (after the fourth P wave).

Generally, frst-degree AV block is a benign, asymptomatic condition that does not
require treatment. However, it can indicate disease in the AV node associated with sus-
ceptibility to higher degrees of AV block if drugs are administered that further impair AV
conduction or if the conduction disease progresses.

Second-Degree AV Block

Second-degree AV block is characterized by intermittent failure of AV conduction, resulting
in some P waves that are not followed by a QRS complex. There are two forms of second-
degree AV block. In type I block (also termed Wenckebach block), shown in Figure 12-5,
the degree of AV delay gradually increases with each beat until an impulse is completely
blocked, such that there is no QRS after the P wave for a single beat. Therefore, the ECG
shows a progressive increase in the PR interval from one beat to the next until a single QRS
complex is absent, after which the PR interval shortens to its initial length, and the cycle
starts anew. Type I block almost always results from impaired conduction in the AV node
(rather than more distally in the conduction system). It is usually benign and may be seen
in children, trained athletes, and people with high vagal tone, particularly during sleep. It
may also occur during an acute myocardial infarction because of increased vagal tone or
ischemia of the AV node, but the block is usually temporary. Treatment of type I block is
typically not necessary, but in symptomatic cases, administration of intravenous atropine
or isoproterenol usually improves AV conduction transiently. Occasionally, placement of a
permanent pacemaker is required for symptomatic block that does not resolve spontane-
ously or persists despite the correction of aggravating factors.

In contrast, type II second-degree AV block is a more dangerous condition. It is character-
ized by the sudden intermittent loss of AV conduction, without preceding gradual lengthening
of the PR interval (Fig. 12-6). The block may persist for two or more beats (i.e., two sequen-
tial P waves not followed by QRS complexes), in which case it is known as high-grade AV
VE oa i
Sf Goes Che gases mae

Ei Lal A ee oR
pI LAN LAL Sere el | 3 case onaasasaas are me LAS
Pt peceettes | ferre TE P 3 ieee CoA p cehoretero aah p pe tes p perp
ee ee a Gen eg ge
HGURE 12-6. Second-degree AV block: type II. A QRS complex is blocked (after the fourth P wave) without
gradual lengthening of the preceding PR intervals. While the QRS width in this example is normal, it is often
widened in patients with type IT block.
292 chapter 12
EE Ga a eee et EE Ean EP ae a Ee
pelea GU Lishihrctaed sete ieee deeb bette act Ul
PUR EASA oot tat IGA
LALA A ALAA UA
fee eee eet eee sete, a
Ee p TEE hel P dee ttoat: P ca dsatetite P sede ba P bie P erahin
ees a ee en Gen
HGURE12-7. High-grade AV block. Sequential QRS complexes are blocked (after the second and third
P waves).
block (Fig. 12-7). Type I block is usually caused by conduction block distal to the AV node
(in the bundle of His or more distally in the Purkinje system), and the QRS pattern often is
widened in a pattern of right or left bundle branch block. This type of block may arise from
extensive myocardial infarction involving the septum or from chronic degeneration of the
His—Purkinje system. It usually indicates severe disease and may progress to complete heart
block without warning; therefore, a pacemaker is usually warranted, even in asymptomatic
patients.

Third-Degree AV Block
Third-degree AV block, also termed complete heart block (Fig. 12-8), is present when
there is complete failure of conduction between the atria and ventricles. In adults, the
most common causes are acute myocardial infarction and chronic degeneration of the
conduction pathways with advanced age. Third-degree AV block electrically disconnects
the atria and ventricles; there is no relationship between the P waves and QRS complexes
because the atria depolarize in response to SA node activity, while a more distal escape
rhythm drives the ventricles independently. Thus, the P waves “march out” at a rate that
is not related to the intervals at which QRS complexes appear. Depending on the site of
the escape rhythm, the QRS complexes may be of normal width and occur at 40 to 60 bpm
(originating from the AV node) or may be widened and occur at slower rates (originating
from the His—Purkinje system). As a result of the slow rate, patients frequently experi-
ence light-headedness or syncope. Permanent pacemaker implantation is almost always
necessary.

The term AV dissociation is a general description that refers to any situation in which the
atria and ventricles beat independently, without any direct relationship between P waves and
QRS complexes. Third-degree AV block is one example of AV dissociation.

EERE seat ue ae tau ems et pee anna ene red ey eet ane ae nee ee Ta
Sg ee ee
Se) Ghee (Sneee Wena wees
Sac SUcese ees eae reee at ceat Teo gaat eet er WE DU Eea aut eat taeda
eo ee ee LJ Gee | ee
Sng gp a ae Ee ee ef bencect deca donno meee | te ee a ees Be sae iu. - —- : deen
citht p Aas p peice p pepe p pro p Se p Se p SH  p ee

Heb EEE EEE peas eene; eebep ir ip rpppdce fd Seene sone So00e Sass Seenn eee eeenes Sonos sueasbenen San oH
HGURE12-8. Third-degree AV block. The P wave and QRS rhythms are independent of one another. The QRS
complexes are widened as they originate within the distal ventricular conduction system, not at the bundle of
His. The second and fourth P waves are superimposed on normal T waves.
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 293
TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
When the heart rate is greater than 100 bpm for three beats or more, a tachyarrhythmia is
present. Tachyarrhythmias result from one of the three mechanisms described in Chapter 11:
enhanced automaticity, reentry, or triggered activity. Tachyarrhythmias are categorized into
those that arise above the ventricles (supraventricular) and those that arise within the ventricles.
Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Figure 12-9 presents a schema to help organize the common supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias presented in this section.
Sinus Tachycardia
Sinus tachycardia is characterized by an SA node discharge rate greater than 100 bpm (typi-
cally 100 to 180 bpm) with normal P waves and QRS complexes (Fig. 12-10). This rhythm
most often results from increased sympathetic and/or decreased vagal tone. Sinus tachy-
cardia is an appropriate physiologic response to exercise. However, it may also result from
sympathetic stimulation in pathologic conditions, including fever, hypoxemia, hyperthyroid-
ism, hypovolemia, and anemia. In disease states, sinus tachycardia is usually a sign of the
severity of the primary pathophysiologic process, and treatment should be directed at the
underlying cause.
= 3 P wave No distinct
shapes P waves
Atrial P-wave Response to carotid
rate (bpm) morphology sinus massage
100-180 Normal Atria] rate
may slow
140-250 Hidden or May abruptly
retrograde terminate
. AV block may
130-250 Differs from increase; doesn’
normal P
usually revert
180-350 “Saw-toothed” AV block may
Increase
HGURE12-9. Differentiation of common supraventricular tachyarrhythmias.
294 (Chapter 12
Se ee ee eee eee
AIOKATTANITAATTANIAATIT ARI TANITARIAATTORS
HGURE 12-10. Sinus tachycardia. The P wave and QRS complexes are normal, but the rate is greater than
100 bpm.

Atrial Premature Beats
Atrial premature beats (APBs) are common in healthy as well as diseased hearts (Fig. 12-11).
They originate from automaticity or reentry in an atrial focus outside the SA node and are
often exacerbated by sympathetic stimulation. APBs are usually asymptomatic but may cause
palpitations. On the ECG, an APB appears as an earlier-than-expected P wave with an abnor-
mal shape (the impulse does not arise from the SA node, resulting in an abnormal sequence
of conduction through the atria). The QRS complex that follows the P wave is usually normal,
resembling the QRS during sinus rhythm, because ventricular conduction is not impaired.
However, if the abnormal atrial focus fires very soon after the previous beat, the impulse may
encounter an AV node that is still refractory to excitation, resulting in a blocked impulse that
does not conduct to the ventricles. In that case, the premature P wave is not followed by a
QRS complex and is termed a blocked APB. Similarly, if the ectopic focus fires just a bit later
in diastole, it may conduct through the AV node but encounter portions of the His—Purkinje
system (typically the right or left bundle branch) that are still refractory. As a result of failure
of conduction in one of the bundle branches, the impulse is conducted through a portion of
the ventricles more slowly than normal, producing QRS complexes that are abnormally wide
(termed an APB with aberrant conduction).

APBs require treatment only if they are symptomatic. Because caffeine, alcohol, and adren-
ergic stimulation (e.g., emotional stress) can all predispose to APBs, it is important to address
these factors. B-Blockers are the initial preferred pharmacologic treatment if needed.

Atrial Hutter

Atrial futter is characterized by rapid, regular atrial activity at a rate of 180 to 350 bpm
(Fig. 12-12). Many of these fast impulses reach the AV node during its refractory period and
do not conduct to the ventricles, resulting in a slower ventricular rate, often an even frac-
tion of the atrial rate. Thus, if the atrial rate is 300 bpm and 2:1 block occurs at the AV node
(i.e., every other atrial impulse finds the AV node refractory), the ventricular rate is 150 bpm.
Because vagal maneuvers (e.g., carotid sinus massage) decrease AV nodal conduction, they
increase the degree of block, temporarily slowing the ventricular rate, which allows better
visualization of the underlying atrial activity. In general, atrial futter is caused by reentry
over a large anatomically fixed circuit. In the common form of atrial f utter, this circuit is the
gh eet

Pea CN Ce eee
plea eer or et an PVF Ug gga ete Pe et NRE eet
Te soe eee
H@GURE12-11. Atrial premature beat (APB). The P wave occurs earlier than expected, and its shape is abnormal.
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 295

S| poh gg beet
Segoe cee eee eee aoe gee sees ee Gee
Seg eed ee ia Sees ears =
Lahn MAAS ANN AR AAAI
eee Gia | Gn ange Gans J
eae ste a eos lire oy me ede eee eg Meee a
HGURE 12-12. Atrial flutter is typif ed by rapid “saw-toothed” atrial activity (arrows).
atrial tissue along the tricuspid valve annulus: the circulating depolarization wave propagates
up the interatrial septum, across the roof and down the free wall of the right atrium, and
finally along the foor of the right atrium between the tricuspid valve annulus and inferior
vena cava. Because large parts of the atrium are depolarized throughout the cycle, P waves
often have a sinusoidal or “sawtooth” appearance. Large futter circuits can occur in other
parts of the right or left atrium as well, usually associated with areas of atrial scarring from
disease, prior heart surgery, or ablation procedures.

Atrial f utter generally occurs in patients with preexisting heart disease. It may be paroxysmal
and transient, persistent (lasting for days or weeks), or permanent. Symptoms of atrial f ut-
ter depend on the accompanying ventricular rate. If the rate is less than 100 bpm, the patient
may be asymptomatic. Conversely, faster rates often cause palpitations, dyspnea, or weakness.
Paradoxically, antiarrhythmic medications that reduce the rate of atrial futter by slowing con-
duction in the atrium may make the rhythm more dangerous by allowing the AV node more
time to recover between impulses. In this situation, the AV node may begin to conduct in a 1:1
fashion, producing very rapid ventricular rates. For example, a patient with atrial f utter at a rate
of 280 bpm and 2:1 conduction block at the AV node would have a ventricular rate of 140 bpm.
If the atrial rate then slows to 220 bpm, the AV node may be able to recover sufficiently between
depolarizations to conduct every atrial impulse, causing the ventricular rate to accelerate to 220
bpm. In patients with limited cardiac reserve, this acceleration may result in a profound reduc-
tion of cardiac output and hypotension. Atrial f utter also predisposes to atrial thrombus forma-
tion, and anticoagulation therapy is often appropriate, as described below for atrial fibrillation.

Several approaches for the conversion of atrial f utter to sinus rhythm are available:

1. For symptomatic patients with recent-onset atrial futter, the most expeditious therapy
is electrical cardioversion to restore sinus rhythm. This technique is also used to revert
chronic atrial f utter that has not responded to other approaches.

2. Flutter can be terminated by rapid atrial stimulation (burst pacing) using a temporary or
permanent pacemaker (see Chapter 11). This procedure can be used when temporary atrial
pacing wires are already present, as in the days following cardiac surgery. In addition,
certain types of permanent pacemakers and implanted defibrillators can be programmed to
perform burst pacing automatically when atrial f utter occurs.

3. Patients without an immediate need for cardioversion can begin pharmacologic therapy.
First, the ventricular rate is slowed by drugs that increase AV block: B-blockers, certain cal-
cium channel blockers (e.g., verapamil, diltiazem), or digoxin. Once the rate is effectively
slowed, attempts can be made to restore sinus rhythm using antiarrhythmic drugs that slow
conduction or prolong the refractory period of the atrial myocardium (usually class IC or
class III agents; see Chapter 17). Should these drugs fail to convert the rhythm, electrical
cardioversion can be undertaken. Once sinus rhythm has been restored, antiarrhythmic
drugs may be administered chronically to prevent recurrences.
296 Chapter 12
4. When chronic therapy is required to prevent recurrences, catheter ablation is often a bet-
ter alternative than pharmacologic approaches. In this method, an electrode catheter is
inserted into the femoral vein, passed via the inferior vena cava to the right atrium, and
used to localize and cauterize (ablate) part of the reentrant loop to permanently interrupt
the f utter circuit.
Atrial Fibrillation
AF is a chaotic rhythm with an atrial rate so fast (350 to 600 discharges/ min) that distinct P
waves are not discernible on the ECG (Fig. 12-13). As with atrial futter, many of the atrial
impulses encounter refractory tissue at the AV node, allowing only some of the depolariza-
tions to be conducted to the ventricles in a very irregular fashion (indicated by a characteristic
“irregularly irregular” rhythm). The average ventricular rate in untreated AF is approximately
140 to 160 bpm. Because discrete P waves are not visible on the ECG, the baseline shows
low-amplitude undulations punctuated by QRS complexes and T waves.

The mechanism of AF likely involves multiple wandering reentrant circuits within the
atria, and in some patients, the rhythm repetitively shifts between fibrillation and atrial fut-
ter. When fibrillation is paroxysmal (1.e., sudden, unpredictable episodes), it is often initiated
by rapid firing of foci in sleeves of atrial muscle that extend into the pulmonary veins. To sus-
tain AF, a minimum number of reentrant circuits is needed, and an enlarged atrium increases
the potential for this to occur. Thus, AF is often associated with right or left atrial enlarge-
ment. Accordingly, diseases that increase atrial pressure and size promote AF, including heart
failure, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and pulmonary disease. Thyrotoxicosis and
alcohol consumption can also precipitate AF in some individuals. In addition, AF is a com-
mon rhythm disturbance in the elderly.

As with atrial futter, when the ventricular rate is less than 100 beats/min, AF may be
asymptomatic. When the rate is faster, as may occur before treatment is instituted and when
AV nodal conduction is facilitated by elevated sympathetic tone during illness, the rapid
ventricular rate may compromise cardiac output, resulting in hypotension and pulmonary
congestion (especially in patients with a hypertrophied or “stiff” left ventricle in whom the
loss of normal atrial contraction can significantly reduce left ventricular filling and stroke
volume). AF is also an important cause of stroke. The absence of organized atrial contrac-
tion promotes blood stasis in the atria, increasing the risk of thrombus formation in the left
atrial appendage (LAA), which can embolize to the cerebral circulation and other systemic
sites. Thus, treatment of AF is directed at three aspects of the arrhythmia: (1) ventricular rate
control, (2) assessment of the need for anticoagulation to prevent thromboembolism, and (3)
consideration of methods to restore sinus rhythm.

Antiarrhythmic drug treatment of AF is similar to that of atrial f utter. B-Blockers or certain
Ca** channel antagonists (diltiazem, verapamil) are administered to promote block at the AV
node so as to reduce the ventricular rate. Digitalis is less effective for this purpose, although
it may be useful in patients with accompanying impairment of ventricular contractile func-
tion. For those who remain symptomatic despite adequate rate control, conversion to sinus
rhythm is usually attempted, as described in the next paragraph. AF that has been present
HGURE12-13. Atrial f brillation is characterized by chaotic atrial activity without organized P waves
and by irregularity of the ventricular (QRS) rate.
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 297
for more than 48 hours may predispose to atrial thrombus formation, and systemic antico-
agulation (for at least 3 weeks) is usually warranted prior to cardioversion to reduce the risk
of thromboembolism. Alternatively, a transesophageal echocardiogram can be performed to
evaluate for the presence of thrombus; if none is found, cardioversion may proceed directly,
with minimum thromboembolic risk, provided that anticoagulation is instituted for several
weeks thereafter (since recovery of normal atrial contraction may be delayed for a period of
time following cardioversion). Anticoagulant drugs are described in Chapter 17.

Cardioversion to sinus rhythm can be attempted chemically by administration of class IC,
IA, or III antiarrhythmic drugs (see Chapter 17 for descriptions of these classes). Alternatively,
electrical cardioversion can be undertaken. Following successful conversion to sinus rhythm,
antiarrhythmic drugs are often continued in an attempt to prevent recurrences. Note that
these drugs have the capacity to cause serious, sometimes lethal, side effects (see Chapter
17). Thus, in patients with asymptomatic AF, it is often appropriate to simply control the ven-
tricular rate and continue anticoagulation therapy chronically, rather than to pursue cardio-
version. Such an approach is supported by clinical trials of AF that have assessed long-term
clinical outcomes.

Because the effcacies and toxicities of antiarrhythmic drugs have been disappointing,
nonpharmacologic options for the management of AF have been devised. For example, the
surgical maze procedure places multiple incisions in the left and right atria to prevent the for-
mation of reentry circuits and is sometimes performed in patients undergoing cardiac surgery
for coronary artery or valve disease who also have AF. A less invasive approach is percutane-
ous catheter ablation. In this approach, areas of the left atrium around the pulmonary veins
are cauterized to interrupt potential reentry circuits and foci that initiate AF. Doing so requires
extensive catheter manipulation and ablation in the left atrium, and risks of the procedure
includes stroke from systemic thromboembolism and cardiac perforation that can cause peri-
cardial tamponade. Thus, catheter ablation for AF is usually reserved for patients who remain
symptomatic despite pharmacologic approaches. When sinus rhythm cannot be maintained
and the heart rate cannot be controlled adequately with medications, catheter ablation of the
AV node is another available procedure. This method intentionally creates complete heart
block as a means to permanently slow the ventricular rate. Permanent ventricular pacemaker
placement is then also required to generate an adequate ventricular rate.

Left atrial appendage (LAA) ligation or occlusion, which can be performed through open
surgical or percutaneous techniques, excludes the LAA from the circulation, removing it as
a source of thrombi that can embolize to cause strokes. The advantages and risks of such
approaches to prevent stroke in AF are still being def ned.

Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardias

Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias (PSVTs) are manifested by (1) sudden onset and ter-
mination, (2) atrial rates between 140 and 250 bpm, and (3) narrow (normal) QRS complexes
(Fig. 12-14), unless aberrant conduction is present, as summarized later. The mechanism of
FS Ete a fae Epa in Ga
Ez Ed Emer eal Gaal Ga'ceeea Comes le (eames (enna b (eeu en) deeees| Geaices Ga face: Conmace (eu lues |Oeend | \eeaces Wesabe Greate 0
1 a a a
(COCO SIC SII
Ff EG EG EE ES EG TES EGE GS GS
HGURE 12-14. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia caused by AV nodal reentry. Retrograde P waves in
this example occur simultaneously with, and are “hidden” in, the QRS complexes.
298 (chapter 12
PSVTs is most often reentry involving the AV node, atrium, or an accessory pathway between
an atrium and a ventricle. Enhanced automaticity and triggered activity in the atrium or AV
node are less common causes.

AV Nodal Reentrant Tachycardia
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is the most common form of PSVT in
adults. In the normal heart, the AV node is a lobulated structure that consists of a compact
portion and several atrial extensions. The latter constitute two (or more) potential pathways
for conduction through the AV node (Fig. 12-15). In some people, these extensions have dif-
ferent conduction times, providing both slow- and fast-conducting pathways. The fast path-
way is characterized by a rapid conduction velocity, whereas the slow pathway demonstrates
slower conduction but typically has a shorter refractory period than does the fast pathway.
Thus, although the fast pathway conducts rapidly, it takes longer to recover between impulses
compared with the slow pathway. Normally, a stimulus arriving at the AV node travels down
both pathways, but the impulse traveling down the fast pathway reaches the bundle of His
first. By the time the impulse traversing the slow pathway reaches the bundle of His, it
encounters refractory tissue and is extinguished. Thus, under normal conditions, only the fast
pathway impulse makes its way forward to the ventricles (see Fig. 12-15A).

In contrast, consider what happens when an APB spontaneously occurs (Fig. 12-15B).
Because the refractory period of the fast pathway is relatively long, an APB would find that
pathway unexcitable and unable to conduct the impulse. However, the impulse is able to
conduct over the slow pathway (which is excitable because it has a shorter refractory period
than does the fast pathway and has already repolarized when the APB arrives). By the time
this impulse travels down the slowly conducting pathway and reaches the compact portion
of the AV node, the distal end of the fast pathway may have had time to repolarize, and the
impulse is able to propagate both distally (to the bundle of His and ventricles) and backward
to the atria, up the fast pathway in a retrograde direction. On reaching the atria, the impulse
can then circulate back down the slow pathway, completing the reentrant loop and initiating
tachycardia as this sequence repeats. Thus, the fundamental conditions for reentry in AVNRT
in this example are transient unidirectional block in the fast pathway (an APB encountering
refractory tissue) and relatively slow conduction through the other pathway.

The ECG in AVNRT shows a regular tachycardia with normal-width QRS complexes. P
waves may not be apparent, because retrograde atrial depolarization typically occurs simul-
taneously with ventricular depolarization (see Fig. 12-14). Thus, the retrograde P wave and
QRS are inscribed at the same time, and the P is typically “hidden” in the QRS complex. When
P waves are visible, they are superimposed on the terminal portion of the QRS complex and
inverted (negative def ection) in limb leads II, III, and aVF, because of the caudocranial direc-
tion of atrial activation.

Rarely, the reentrant loop revolves in the reverse direction, with anterograde conduction
down the fast pathway and retrograde conduction up the slow pathway. This is known as
uncommon AVNRT and, unlike the more common rhythm, typically results in clearly visible
retrograde P waves following the QRS complex on the ECG.

AVNRT often presents in teenagers or young adults. It is usually well tolerated but causes
palpitations that many patients find frightening, and rapid tachycardias can cause light-
headedness or shortness of breath. In elderly patients or those with underlying heart disease,
more severe symptoms may result, such as syncope, angina, or pulmonary edema.

Acute treatment of AVNRT is aimed at terminating reentry by impairing conduction in the
AV node. Transient increases in vagal tone produced by the Valsalva maneuver or carotid
sinus massage (see Chapter 11) may block AV conduction, stopping the tachycardia. The
most rapidly effective pharmacologic treatment is intravenous adenosine, which impairs AV
Cinical Aspects of Cardiac Arrhythmias 299
Compact
AV node
i
l Bundle of His
Right atrium
i
l
| IVS
Impulse from
SA node
Ae Tricus pid valve
A
i
Unidi .
a Bundle of His
Atrial
premature
beat
B
HGURE12-15. G@mmon mechanism of AV nodal reentry. In most patients, the AVnode is a lobulated
structure consisting proximally of several atrial extensions and distally of a compact node portion. A. In
patients with AVnodal reentry, two functionally distinct tracts exist within the AVnode (termed the slow and
fast pathways). The slow pathway conducts slowly and has a short refractory period, whereas the fast pathway
conducts more rapidly but has a long refractory period. Impulses from above conduct down both pathways;
because the fast pathway impulse reaches the distal common pathway frst, it continues to the bundle of His.
Qnversely, the slow pathway impulse arrives later and encounters refractory tissue. B An atrial premature beat
arrives at the entrance of the two pathways. The fast pathway is still refractory from the preceding beat and the
impulse is blocked, but the slow pathway has repolarized and is able to conduct. When the impulse reaches the
distal portion of the fast pathway after traveling down the slower pathway, the fast pathway has repolarized and
is able to conduct the impulse in a retrograde direction (exemplifying unidirectional block) as shown by the green
pathway. The impulse can then travel back to the slow pathway, and a reentrant loop is initiated.
nodal conduction and often aborts the reentrant rhythm (see Chapter 17). Other drug options
include intravenous calcium channel antagonists (verapamil and diltiazem) or B-blockers.
Most patients with AVNRT have infrequent episodes that terminate with vagal maneuvers and
do not require other specif c interventions. Frequent symptomatic episodes, particularly when
requiring visits to the emergency department for treatment, warrant preventive therapy: oral
300 chapter 12
B-blockers, calctum channel blockers, or digoxin is often successful for this purpose. Catheter
ablation of the slow AV nodal pathway is usually curative and recommended when pharmaco-
logic therapy fails or is not desired by the patient, but has a small risk (<2%) of heart block owing
to unintended damage to the fast AV nodal pathway, a complication that requires permanent
pacemaker implantation. Chronic class IC or IA antiarrhythmic drugs are also effective but are
often less desirable than catheter ablation, because of associated potential drug toxicities.

Atrioventricular Reentrant Tachycardias
Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardias (AVRTs) are similar to AVNRTs except that in the for-
mer, one limb of the reentrant loop is constituted by an accessory pathway (bypass tract),
rather than by separate fast and slow pathways within the AV node itself. As described in
Chapter 11, an accessory pathway is an abnormal band of myocytes that spans the AV groove
and connects atrial to ventricular tissue separately from the normal conduction system (see
Fig. 11-10). Approximately 1 in 1,500 people has such a pathway.

Accessory pathways allow an impulse to conduct from atrium to ventricle (anterograde con-
duction), from ventricle to atrium (retrograde conduction), or in both directions. Depending
on the characteristics of the pathway, one of two characteristic entities can result: (1) the ven-
tricular preexcitation syndrome or (2) PSVT resulting from a concealed accessory pathway.
Some pathways do not conduct impulses at rates suff cient to cause tachycardias and cause
no symptoms at all.

Ventricular Preexcitation Syndrome
In patients with ventricular preexcitation (also termed Wolff—Parkinson—White [WPW] syn-
drome; see Chapter 11), atrial impulses can pass in an anterograde direction to the ventricles
through both the AV node and the accessory pathway. Because conduction through the acces-
sory pathway is usually faster than that via the AV node, the ventricles are stimulated earlier
than by normal conduction over the AV node. During sinus rhythm, activation of the ventricle
from the accessory pathway causes a characteristic ECG appearance: (1) the PR interval is
shortened (less than 0.12 seconds) because ventricular stimulation begins earlier than nor-
mal through the accessory pathway, (2) the QRS has a slurred rather than a sharp upstroke
(referred to as a delta wave) because the initial ventricular activation by the accessory path-
way is slower than activation over the Purkinje system, and (3) the QRS complex is widened
because it represents fusion of two excitation wave fronts through the ventricles, one from
the accessory pathway and one from the normal His—Purkinje system (Figs. 12-16 and 12-17).

Patients with WPW syndrome are predisposed to PSVTs because the accessory pathway
provides a potential limb of a reentrant loop. The most common PSVT in these patients is ortho-
dromic AVRT. During this tachycardia, an impulse travels anterogradely down the AV node to
the ventricles and then retrogradely up the accessory tract back to the atria (see Fig. 12-17B).

Seay Seoes Suuuseueusseeauenstusuecesessesesane sere SaaEgeEe
Ea ae ee
SE eee ere arate Ee at a rao
Se ae a
HAL ae NO ee ee
srdur diff fSutanoususneasocang ect] CoMfaQovayshentaggus eats volta afat inset tags socezcahct # agestateqausesseassqes(incts fatOietEN{ di
Seca ata daste ceded eta nual oed teas ease set] fed gana] TTA TT aaRGeeee teed erence a PELE TTL
HGURE 12-16. Wolff—Parkinson—White syndrome. The delta wave (arrow) indicates preexcitation of the
ventricles. Note the shortened PR interval.
Cinical Aspects of Cardiac Arrhythmias 301
A B Ortho dro mic C Antidro mic
Sinus Rhythm Atrioventricular Atrioventricular
Reentrant Reentrant
Tachycardia Tachycardia
ag SA node O O
< '
Fa . Atria a ~ ni a
‘ ‘ v 1 \
; i
! ! 1
i ' ' +
¥ BAS Ventricles ' AP \ 4
/NX 1 ON \ LZ\N
aS ,a
Delta | i |
ALE hn NU
\ 7 N17
Retrograde Retrograde
P waves P waves
HGURE 12-17. Wolff—Parkinson—White syndrome. A. During normal sinus rhythm, the shortened PR
interval, delta wave, and widened QRS complex indicate fusion of ventricular activation via the AVnode and
accessory pathway (AP). B An atrial premature beat can trigger an orthodromic atrioventricular reentrant
tachycardia, in which impulses are conducted anterogradely down the AVnode and retrogradely up the
accessory pathway. Retrograde P waves are visible immediately after the QRS complex. There is no delta
wave because anterograde ventricular stimulation passes exclusively through the AVnode. C Antidromic
atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia in which impulses are conducted anterogradely down the accessory tract
and retrogradely up the AVnode. The QRS complex is greatly widened because the ventricles are stimulated by
abnormal conduction through the accessory pathway rather than via the His-Purkinje system. SA, sinoatrial.
Because the ventricles in this situation are depolarized exclusively via the normal conduction
system (through the AV node and the bundle of His), there is no delta wave during the tachy-
cardia and the width of the QRS is usually normal. Retrograde P waves are often visible soon
after each QRS complex because the atria are stimulated from below via retrograde conduction
through the accessory pathway.

In fewer than 10% of patients with AVRT involving an accessory pathway, the reentrant
arrhythmia travels in the opposite direction. Impulses travel anterogradely down the acces-
sory pathway and retrogradely up the AV node (see Fig. 12-17C). Termed antidromic AVRT,
its ECG pattern is characterized by a wide QRS complex because the ventricles are activated
entirely from anterograde conduction over the accessory pathway. From the ECG alone, such
antidromic tachycardia is difficult to distinguish from ventricular tachycardia (described later
in the chapter).

A third type of arrhythmia encountered in patients with WPW syndrome is anterograde
conduction over the accessory pathway when AF or atrial f utter is present. Some accessory
pathways have short refractory periods that allow faster rates of ventricular stimulation than
does the AV node. Thus, during AF or atrial futter, ventricular rates as fast as 300 bpm may
result. Such rates are poorly tolerated and can lead to ventricular fibrillation and cardiac
arrest, even in a young, otherwise healthy patient.

Pharmacologic management of arrhythmias in patients with the WPW syndrome requires
greater caution than that of those with AVNRTs. Although digitalis, B-blockers, and certain
302 chapter 12

calcium channel blockers are effective at blocking conduction through the AV node, they do
not slow conduction over most accessory pathways. Sometimes these drugs actually shorten
the refractory period of the accessory pathway, thus speeding conduction. Therefore, the drugs
could precipitate even faster ventricular rates (and hemodynamic collapse) when adminis-
tered to patients with WPW syndrome who develop AF or f utter. In contrast, sodium chan-
nel blockers (specifically, class IA and IC antiarrhythmics) and some class III antiarrhythmic
drugs slow conduction and prolong the refractory period of accessory pathways as well as the
AV node; therefore, these are the preferred pharmacologic agents for this condition.

When a patient with WPW presents with a wide QRS tachycardia, acute therapy depends
on the patient’s tolerance of the arrhythmia. If accompanied by hemodynamic collapse,
immediate cardioversion is required. Conversely, if the patient is hemodynamically stable,
intravenous administration of procainamide (a class IA agent that slows conduction in the
accessory pathway) or ibutilide (a class III agent that prolongs refractoriness in the accessory
pathway) will often terminate the arrhythmia.

Patients who have WPW with symptomatic arrhythmias should generally undergo an inva-
sive electrophysiologic study with radiofrequency ablation of the accessory pathway. Ablation
abolishes conduction over the pathway, curing the condition. If this procedure is not an
option, chronic oral therapy should include a drug that slows accessory pathway conduction
(i.e., a class IA, IC, or III agent).

The Lown—Ganong-—Levine syndrome is also characterized by a short PR interval but a
normal, narrow QRS complex (i.e., no delta wave during sinus rhythm). It used to be consid-
ered a form of preexcitation, but most patients just have enhanced conduction through the
normal AV node, thus shortening the PR interval. When PSVT occurs in these patients, it is
usually simply due to AV nodal reentry.

Qoncealed Accessory Pathways
Accessory pathways do not always result in ECG findings of ventricular preexcitation (i.e.,
short PR, delta wave). Many are capable of only retrograde conduction. In this case, during
sinus rhythm, the ventricles are depolarized normally through the AV node alone and the ECG
is normal (i.e., the accessory pathway is concealed). However, because the accessory pathway
is capable of retrograde conduction, it can form a limb ofa reentrant circuit under appropriate
circumstances and result in orthodromic AVRT.

Management of patients with tachycardia involving a concealed accessory pathway is the
same as for patients with AVNRT. Because the reentrant circuit travels anterogradely down the AV
node, vagal maneuvers and drugs that interrupt conduction over the AV node (e.g., adenosine,
verapamil, diltiazem, and B-blockers) can terminate the tachycardia. Another option for recur-
rent episodes is catheter ablation of the accessory pathway, which is curative in most patients.

Focal Atrial Tachycardia
Focal atrial tachycardia (AT) results from either automaticity of an atrial ectopic site or reentry.
The ECG has the appearance of sinus tachycardia, with a P wave before each QRS complex,
but the P-wave morphology is different from that of sinus rhythm, indicating depolarization
of the atrium from an abnormal location. The arrhythmia can be paroxysmal and of limited
duration, or it can persist. Short, asymptomatic bursts of AT are commonly observed on
24-hour ECG recordings, even in otherwise healthy people.

AT can be caused by digitalis toxicity and is also aggravated by elevated sympathetic
tone (e.g., during exertion or periods of illness). Initial treatment includes correction of any
contributing factors. Unlike AVNRT or AVRT, vagal maneuvers (such as carotid sinus mas-
sage) may have no effect on atrial discharges from an ectopic pacemaker focus. However,
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 303
gS SE EP i
SE SU UU SUE GH SE VES
i GAUGE an | Ln SP ii Ge 2
= sl a atte ae 1 PR aut Alm tn tld dll a
fertebe pear apna retin Peder t
HGURE 12-18. Multifocal atrial tachycardia. The rhythm is irregular, and each QRS is preceded by a P wave
of varying morphology.
B-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and class IC, IA, and III antiarrhythmic drugs can be
effective. Catheter ablation is also a useful option for symptomatic patients.
Multifocal Atrial Tachycardia
In multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT), the ECG shows an irregular rhythm with multiple (at
least three different) P-wave morphologies, and the average atrial rate is greater than 100 bpm
(Fig. 12-18). An isoelectric (1.e., “f at”) baseline between P waves distinguishes MAT from the chaotic
baseline of AF. This rhythm is likely caused by either abnormal automaticity in several foci within
the atria or triggered activity and occurs most often in the setting of severe pulmonary disease and
hypoxemia. Because patients with this rhythm are often critically ill from the underlying disease,
the mortality rate is high, and treatment is aimed at the causative disorder. The calcium chan-
nel blocker verapamil is often effective at slowing the ventricular rate as a temporizing measure.
Ventricular Arrhythmias
Ventricular arrhythmias include (1) ventricular premature beats (VPBs), (2) ventricular
tachycardia (VT), and (3) ventricular fibrillation (VF). Ventricular arrhythmias are usually
more dangerous than supraventricular rhythm disorders and are responsible for many of the
approximately 300,000 sudden cardiac deaths that occur every year in the United States.
Ventricular Premature Beats
A VPB arises when an ectopic ventricular focus fires an action potential. On the ECG, a VPB
appears as a widened QRS complex, because the impulse travels from its ectopic site through the
ventricles via slow cell-to-cell connections rather than through the normal rapidly conducting His—
Purkinje system (Fig. 12-19). Furthermore, the ectopic beat is not related to a preceding P wave.
VPBs can also occur in repeating patterns. When every alternate beat is a VPB, the rhythm
is termed bigeminy. When two normal beats precede every VPB, trigeminy is present.
Consecutive VPBs are referred to as couplets (two in a row) or triplets (three in a row).
Similar to APBs, VPBs are common even among healthy people and are often asymptom-
atic and benign. Specific precipitants of VPBs include medications (e.g., B-adrenergic receptor
HGURE 12-19. Ventricular premature beats (arrows).
304 chapter 12

ACA a ae ae pa a
ee ee ee a ee
eee eee
RAV AVAVAVAVAVAVAVATAVAAIVAVAVAVALY:
Fle a lee ee ea (eee dee a anon ded a a nat tal ae a
HGURE 12-20. Mbonomorphic ventricular tachycardia.

agonists), caffeine, electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia), and
hypoxia. VPBs are not dangerous by themselves, and in patients without heart disease, they
confer no added risk of a life-threatening arrhythmia. They can, however, be an indication of
an underlying cardiac disorder and take on added signif cance in that case. For example, in
patients with structural heart disease, VPBs generally increase in frequency in relation to the
severity of depressed ventricular contractility. They have been associated with an increased
risk of sudden death in patients with heart failure or prior myocardial infarction.

In otherwise healthy persons, treatment of VPBs mainly involves reassurance and, if
needed, symptomatic control using B-blockers. In patients with advanced structural heart
disease with features that place them at risk of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, place-
ment of an implantable cardioverter—def brillator (ICD) is typically recommended.

Ventricular Tachycardia

VT is a series of three or more consecutive VPBs (Fig. 12-20). VT is divided arbitrarily into
two categories. If it persists for more than 30 seconds, produces severe symptoms, such as
syncope, or requires termination by cardioversion or administration of an antiarrhythmic
drug, it is designated as sustained VT; shorter, self-terminating episodes are termed non-
sustained VT. Both forms of VT are found most commonly in patients with structural heart
disease, including myocardial ischemia and infarction, heart failure, ventricular hypertrophy,
primary electrical diseases (e.g., long-QT syndromes [LQTS]; see Box 12-1), valvular heart
diseases, and congenital cardiac abnormalities.

De

BOX12-1 Genetic Mutations and Ventricular Arrhythmias

Genetic causes of arrhythmias occur either in association with various types of structural heart

disease or as isolated conditions. Examples of inherited structural disease that can be complicated

by life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the familial
dilated cardiomyopathies, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVO,

which are all described in Chapter 10. ARVC may be suspected on

routine BOG by the presence of inverted T waves in leads V, through vy, HHECE psilon wave dee

V, and occasionally an epsilon wave, a terminal notch of the QRS Beeeae (aua7 4a geEEEEEEETEa ISETESEEEEE

complex in lead V, (see arrow in the adjacent figure), which ref ects Basa | PNGUGGDGEEESRTOPSO®  PUETEEDSE

Several other inherited arrhythmic disorders occur in the saesaa {SSSSaGUEESVGEET008 (SETGETENE
absence of structural cardiac disease. These occur infrequently but

are important because they can cause life-threatening polymorphic VI or VF in young, otherwise

healthy people without prior warning. The most common of these conditions are (1) the Brugada

syndrome, (2) the congenital LOIS, and (3) familial catecholaminergic polymorphic VE
The Brugada syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and has been linked in
some (but not all) families to mutations in a sodium channel subunit gene (SCNSA). Aclue to the
Clinical Aspects of Cardiac Arrhythmias 305
BOX12-1 Genetic Mutations and Ventricular Arrhythmias (continued)
presence of this syndrome is a specific ECG finding of prominent ST elevation in leads V, through
V; (see adjacent figure). This pattern may be present chronically or intermittently; in the latter
case, the syndrome may be unmasked by administering sodium channel blocking antiarrhythmic
drugs (e.g., f ecainide, procainamide, which are described in Chapter 17). Brugada syndrome
is a potentially lethal condition, and I@ implantation is the most effective way to prevent an
arrhythmic death.

The congenital long Ql syndromes are associated with ee
prolonged ventricular repolarization (hence the long QT interval), vi os Eves ies Extensis ESSOCraes
which can lead to life-threatening polymorphic VI (i.e., torsades Bead cat, Care) AGU ass eenUnee< CEELEES
de pointes). Mutations in a number of different genes result in BEEP ert tatafadatosecener' fof vated
prolonging the action potential duration. Mbst identified mutations sous :oesezazazataanazssasaeazazazsea2
alter ion channel function to either enhance the depolarizing
Ne current or impair the repolarizing K current. Autosomal dominant and recessive patterns of
inheritance occur.

Gene penetrance and symptomatology of patients with LOIS is highly variable, even for
individuals with the same mutation. The degree of QI prolongation and, in some cases, the patient’s
gender are predictors of arrhythmic risk when a mutation is present. An affected patient may be
asymptomatic and come to medical attention only as a result of the abnormal ECGor because of a
family member who died suddenly. Others present with syncope or sudden death caused by torsades
de pointes. The most common forms (LQI and LQ) are associated with ventricular arrhythmias
during physical exercise (particularly swimming) or emotional stress. Gonversely, those with LQT3 are
much more likely to experience cardiac events at rest or during sleep.

Other acquired conditions that further prolong the QT interval can trigger life-threatening
arrhythmias in patients with LOTS, including hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia,
and several medications (including many antiarrhythmic drugs). Gonversely, B-blockers reduce
the risk of arrhythmias in many forms of congenital LOTS, even though they do not shorten
the QT interval. For patients at high risk of life-threatening arrhythmias, ICD implantation is
warranted.

Familial catecholaminergic polymorphic VI, inherited in autosomal dominant and recessive
patterns, is marked by VI and/or VF during exercise or emotional arousal. The mechanism is
thought to be triggered activity resulting from delayed afterdepolarizations (described in Chapter
11). Matations in affected families have been demonstrated in at least two genes involved
in intracellular calcium handling, including a missense mutation in the locus that codes for
the cardiac ryanodine receptor (see Chapter 1). Treatment with a B-blocker, calctum channel
blocker, and/or drug that inhibits ryanodine receptor—mediated calcium release (e.g., the class
ICantiarrhythmic f ecainide has this additional attribute) may be effective; an ICDis also often
recommended.

(enetic Basis of the Three Vbst @mmon On¢genital Long QF Syndromes
Type Gne Protein Mechanism of Prolonged Inheritance
(Location) Repolarization

LOM = KCNOI (11p15) ~~ KVLOM (a subunit of | Outward K* current ADand AR

Ix, K channel)
LO KCNF2 (7935) HERG (o subunit of Ix. | Outward K’ current AD

K channel)
LOB SANSA (3p21) Nav 1.5 (Ne channel) ? Inward Na* current AD
LT
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive.
306 Chapter 12

The QRS complexes of VT are typically wide (greater than 0.12 seconds) and occur at a rate
of 100 to 200 bpm or sometimes faster. VT is further categorized according to its QRS morphol-
ogy. When every QRS complex appears the same and the rate is regular, it is referred to as
monomorphic VT (see Fig. 12-20). Sustained monomorphic VT usually indicates a structural
abnormality that supports a reentry circuit, most commonly a region of myocardial scar from an
old infarction or cardiomyopathy. Occasionally, sustained monomorphic VT occurs as a result
of an ectopic ventricular focus in an otherwise healthy person (referred to as idiopathic VT).

When the QRS complexes continually change in shape and the rate varies from beat to beat,
the VT is referred to as polymorphic. Multiple ectopic foci or a continually changing reentry
circuit is the cause. Torsades de pointes (discussed later in the chapter) and acute myocar-
dial ischemia or infarction are the most common causes of polymorphic VT. Rare, inherited
predispositions to polymorphic VT and sudden death arise from abnormalities of cardiac ion
channels or calcium handling (e.g., the long QT syndromes, the Brugada syndrome, familial
catecholaminergic polymorphic VT), as described in Box 12-1. Sustained polymorphic VT
usually degenerates to VF.

The symptoms of VT vary depending on the rate of the tachycardia, its duration, and the
underlying condition of the heart. Sustained VT can cause low cardiac output resulting in loss
of consciousness (syncope), pulmonary edema, or progress to cardiac arrest. These severe
consequences of VT are most likely in patients who have underlying depressed contractile
function. Conversely, if sustained VT is at a relatively slow rate (e.g., less than 130 bpm), it
may be well tolerated and cause only palpitations.

Distinguishing Monomorphic VI from Supraventricular Tachycardia

VT can usually be distinguished from SVT by the width of the QRS complex: it is routinely
wide in the former and narrow (i.e., normal) in the latter. However, under certain circum-
stances, arrhythmias that originate from sites above the ventricles can result in wide QRS
complexes and may appear similar to monomorphic VT. This situation is termed SVT with
aberrant ventricular conduction, or simply SVT with aberrancy, and may arise in three
scenarios: (1) a patient has an underlying conduction abnormality (e.g., a bundle branch
block), such that the QRS is abnormally wide even when in normal sinus rhythm; (2)
repetitive rapid ventricular stimulation during SVT finds one of the bundle branches refrac-
tory (because of insufficient time to recover from the previous depolarization), such that
the impulse propagates abnormally through the ventricles, causing the QRS to be distorted
and wide; or (3) a patient develops antidromic tachycardia through an accessory pathway
(described earlier).

Certain clinical and electrocardiographic features can help to distinguish wide QRS com-
plexes of monomorphic VT from those of supraventricular rhythms with aberrant conduction.
In patients with a history of prior myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, or left ven-
tricular dysfunction, a wide complex tachycardia is more likely to be VT rather than SVT with
aberrancy. At the bedside, SVT is more probable if vagal maneuvers (such as carotid sinus
massage) affect the rhythm (see Fig. 12-9).

Electrocardiographically, a supraventricular tachyarrhythmia is more likely if the morphol-
ogy of the QRS at the rapid rate is similar to that on the patient’s ECG tracing obtained while
in sinus rhythm (i.e., the complex is widened because of an underlying bundle branch block).
Conversely, VT is more likely if (1) there is no relationship between the QRS complexes and
any observed P waves (AV dissociation) or (2) the QRS complexes in each of the chest leads
(V, through V,.) have a similar appearance, with a dominant positive or negative def ection
(i.e., there is “concordance” of the precordial QRS complexes). These features are summa-
rized in Table 12-2. Other morphologic ECG features have been used to distinguish VT from
SVT with aberrancy, but the distinction is often very difficult. Most patients with wide QRS
tachycardia should be managed as though they have VT until proven otherwise.
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 307
TABLE 12-2
Supports SVI' with Aberrant @nduction Supports Ventricular Tachycardia
QRS morphology same as when in sinus History of prior MI or heart failure
thythm No relationship between P waves and QRS complexes
Rhythm responds to vagal maneuvers Q@ncordance of QRS complexes in the chest leads
(see Hg. 12-9) (V-V.)
a
M, myocardial infarction; SVE supraventricular tachycardia.
Management of Patients with VI
Sustained episodes of VT are dangerous because they can produce syncope or deteriorate into
VE, which is fatal if not quickly corrected. Acute treatment usually consists of electrical car-
dioversion. Intravenous administration of certain antiarrhythmic drugs, such as amiodarone,
procainamide, or lidocaine, can be considered if the patient is hemodynamically stable.

After sinus rhythm is restored, a patient who has had sustained VT requires careful evalu-
ation to define whether underlying structural heart disease is present and to correct any
ageravating factors, such as myocardial ischemia, electrolyte disturbances, or drug toxicities.
Patients who have suffered VT in the setting of structural heart disease have a high risk of
recurrence and sudden cardiac death; implantation of an ICD is usually warranted to auto-
matically and promptly terminate future episodes.

Patients who experience VT in the absence of underlying structural heart disease are usu-
ally found to have idiopathic VT. This type of arrhythmia tends to originate from foci in the
right ventricular outfow tract or in the septal portion of the left ventricle. It is rarely life
threatening. B-Blockers, calcium channel blockers, or catheter ablation is commonly effective
to control symptomatic episodes of idiopathic VT.

Torsades de Pointes
Torsades de pointes (“twisting of the points”) is a form of polymorphic VT that presents
as varying amplitudes of the QRS, as if the complexes were “twisting” about the baseline
(Fig. 12-21). It can result from early afterdepolarizations (triggered activity), particularly
in patients who have a prolonged QT interval. QT prolongation (which indicates a length-
ened action potential duration) can result from electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia
or hypomagnesemia), persistent bradycardia, and drugs that block cardiac potassium
currents, including many antiarrhythmic agents (particularly the class III drugs sotalol,
ibutilide, and dofetilide and some class I drugs, including quinidine, procainamide, and
disopyramide). Many medications administered for noncardiac illnesses can also prolong
STS SS aS st fsbo ne ene qe bee tee Hse shinpest=: Stee tie }secatsss SEs af
FRY ESPSSES TPES EEE SRE fh pS Ee Eee ae yeahs dee Sad oeee amet bee = sua}
let A tn ear ST cn for bopenhe, Prods tas pe tr an RIT eth as erie capbpmubiiotes spain
ree y oEtey oo a i ron poms © Sn Toe one ew + : : 7 os on -
HGURE12-21. Torsade de pointes. The widened polymorphic QRS complexes demonstrate a waxing and
waning pattern.
308 chapter 12

FS EUS ESS eae eee eta ee ue ane ane ane ane ane at ae ane asta at ae ae

FS ES ESSE FESS Eps Fos Ets ne coa cone ened fone lrses enone fetes tne coed oo cosa fonedCoses tenes fneoseneoco

Sta ARES RSE Seen Same els

|e

HGURE 12-22. Ventricular f brillation.

the QT interval and predispose to torsades de pointes, including erythromycin, pheno-

thiazines, haloperidol, and methadone. A rare group of hereditary ion channel abnor-

malities produces congenital QT prolongation, which can also lead to torsades de pointes

(see Box 12-1).

Torsades de pointes is usually symptomatic, causing light-headedness or syncope, but is
frequently self-limited. Its main danger results from degeneration into VF. When it is drug or
electrolyte induced, correcting the underlying trigger abolishes recurrences, but measures to
suppress episodes are required to allow time to address the cause. Administration of intra-
venous magnesium often suppresses repeated episodes. Additional preventive strategies are
aimed at shortening the QT interval by increasing the underlying heart rate with intravenous
B-adrenergic stimulating agents (e.g., isoproterenol) or an artif cial pacemaker. When tors-
ades de pointes results from congenital prolongation of the QT interval (i.e., in the long QT
syndromes), B-blocking drugs are the treatment of choice, because sympathetic stimulation
actually aggravates the arrhythmia.

Ventricular Hbnillation

VF is an immediately life-threatening arrhythmia (Fig. 12-22). It results in disordered, rapid

stimulation of the ventricles with no coordinated contractions. The result is essentially ces-

sation of cardiac output and death if not quickly reversed. This rhythm most often occurs in
patients with severe underlying heart disease and is the major cause of mortality in acute
myocardial infarction.

VF is often initiated by an episode of VT, which degenerates, it is believed, by the breakup
of excitation waves into multiple smaller wavelets of reentry that wander through the myo-
cardium. On the ECG, VF is characterized by a chaotic irregular appearance without discrete
QRS waveforms.

Untreated, VF rapidly leads to death. The only effective therapy is prompt electrical def bril-
lation. As soon as the heart has been converted to a safe rhythm, the underlying precipitant
of the arrhythmia (e.g., myocardial ischemia, electrolyte imbalances, hypoxemia, or acidosis)
should be sought and corrected to prevent further episodes. Intravenous antiarrhythmic drug
therapy may be administered to prevent immediate recurrences. If no reversible inciting pre-
cipitant is found, survivors of VF usually receive an ICD.

SUMMARY

° Disorders of impulse formation and conduction result in bradyarrhythmias (heart rate <60
bpm) and tachyarrhythmias (heart rate > 100 bpm for three beats or more).

° The f ve basic considerations when confronted with a patient with an abnormal heart
rhythm are (1) identif cation, (2) pathogenesis, (3) precipitating factors, (4) clinical presenta-
tion, and (5) treatment.

e When evaluating a patient with a slow heart rhythm, two key questions should be
addressed: (1) are P waves present? and (2) what is the relationship between the P waves
and the QRS complexes?
Clinical Aspects of Gardiac Arrhythmias 309
° Differentiation of tachyarrhythmias requires assessment of (1) the width of the QRS complex
(normal or wide), (2) the morphology and rate of the P waves, (3) the relationship between
the P waves and the QRS complexes, and (4) the response to vagal maneuvers.
e The ECG texts listed at the end of Chapter 4 provide multiple examples of arrhythmias and
are suited for practicing the principles described in this chapter.
Acknowledgments
Contributors to previous editions of this chapter were Ranliang Hu, MD; Hillary K. Rolls, MD;
Wendy Armstrong, MD; Nicholas Boulis, MD; Jennifer E. Ho, MD; Marc S. Sabatine, MD;
Elliott M. Antman, MD; and Leonard I. Ganz, MD.
Additional Reading
January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ ACC/ HRS a Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW, ventricular preexci-
guideline for the management of patients with atrial f bril- tation) electrocardiographic pattern. Heart Rhythm.
lation: A report of the American College of Cardiology/ 2012;9:1006—-1024.
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Roden DM. Clinical practice. Long-QT syndrome. N Engl J
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. Med. 2008;358:169-176.
2014; 130(23):2071—2104. Stevenson WG. Current treatment of ventricular arrhythmias:
Link MS. Clinical practice. Evaluation and initial treat- State of the art. Heart Rhythm. 2013;10:1919-1926.
ment of supraventricular tachycardia. N Engl J Med. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, et al. 2012 ACCF/ AHA/ HRS
2012;367:1438-1448. focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based
Pediatric Congenital Electrophysiology Society, Heart Rhythm therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: A report of the
Society, American College of Cardiology Foundation, American College of Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart
et al. PACES/ HRS expert consensus statement on the Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
management of the asymptomatic young patient with Cardiol. 2012;60:1297-1313.
.
i i
Hypertension via
oe
Joshua Drago \ i
Gordon H. Williams iv
Leonard S. Lilly
Chapter Outline O ver 70 million Americans, and 1 billion people through-
Nee out the world, have hypertension—a blood pressure (BP)
ahhat Is Hypertension: high enough to be a danger to their well-being. This number
semen will undoubtedly rise; data from the Hamingham Heart Study
Hemodynamic Factors indicate that 90% of people over age 55 will develop hyper-
Blood Pressure Reflexes tension during their lifetimes. Thus, this condition represents
Fssential Hypertension a great public health concern because it is a major risk factor
Genetics and Epidemiology for coronary artery disease, stroke, heart failure, renal disease,
Expeumental Findings and peripheral vascular disease. Surprisingly, two thirds of
Natural History . . .
————— hypertensive persons are either unaware of their elevated BP
a or are not treated adequately to minimize the cardiovascu-
Exogenous Causes lar risk. Moreover, because elevated BP is usually asymptom-
Renal Gauses atic until an acute cardiovascular event strikes, screening for
Mechanical Causes hypertension is a critical aspect of preventive medicine.
Cinical Signs and Symptoms cee IDS, PEPSI OLE ELIE OS
Organ Damage Caused by cause of the BP elevation is unknown, a condition termed
Hypertension primary or essential hypertension (EH). Evidence suggests
Hypertensive Cisis that the causes of FH are multiple and diverse, but considera-
Treatment of Hypertension ble insight into those causes can be achieved by studying the
ae iceman normal physiology of BP control, as examined in this chapter.
gic lreatment High BP attributed to a defnable cause is termed
secondary hypertension. Although far less common than
FH, conditions that cause secondary hypertension are impor-
tant because many are amenable to permanent cure. Notably,
310
